Good afternoon, dear listeners. My name is Dmitriyeva Natalia Ivanovna.
I am presenting to you the course on international economic relations.
The topics we will discuss today are the world economy, international economic relations,
balance in the international economy, the modern development of international economic relations,
state regulation of foreign trade, and the final topic of our discussion will be the international financial system and currency regulation.
The first question I would like to draw your attention to is the position of the subject of international economic relations in the system of scientific knowledge.
In principle, there are two positions, two approaches to this issue.
One group of authors believes that international economic relations are fully included in the course of international economics.
Another group of authors believes that this is an independent course that considers more specific economic relations.
Please look at the diagram.
In principle, micro- and macroeconomics as a general theoretical science are the basis of all scientific knowledge related to international economic relations.
International economics as a subject is certainly part of economic theory and includes both international economic relations and the characteristics of the world economy.
In the process of scientific knowledge development, international economic relations as a subject have been cleared from the subject of international economics and have become more independent.
In this course, more specific economic relations are considered.
International economics is closely related to the next course, foreign economic activity.
On the other hand, such a course as world economy considers the problems of various regions and is closely related to the subject of economic geography.
The object of studying international economic relations is certainly the world economy as a whole.
As for the subject, we will pay attention to the development of international economic relations and their modern forms.
The subjects of international economic relations are companies, private individuals, non-profit organizations, national economies as a state, regional systems as regional and state institutions, and even international economic organizations.
New subjects are certainly non-profit organizations and international economic organizations, which have recently become quite active in the process of regulating international economic relations.
In general, the world economy can be characterized as a combination of national economies. It is a combination, because it is assumed that close relations are maintained between them.
Such a combination gives a greater effect for the development of the world economy as a whole than a simple sum of countries.
The development of the world economy is associated with a number of main factors.
First of all, the first factor affecting the development of the world economy is the uneven distribution of production factors across the territory of the Earth.
Adam Smith and David Ricardo once pointed out this. They proved that the reason for international exchange is the difference in the productivity of labor in certain countries.
In turn, this productivity of labor is based on the fact that countries have different production factors.
The next factor affecting the development of the world economy is the movement of production factors. In economic theory, it was named the mobility of production factors.
All these processes, the movement of production factors, the presence of production factors in certain countries, contribute to the development of the international division of labor.
I will go into more detail about the international division of labor and the international division of production factors.
First of all, in the course of economic theory, you once analyzed such production factors as labor, land, capital, entrepreneurship.
In modern conditions, these factors are developing. If we start listing the production factors associated with the activities of a company, we can probably list a large list.
Based on this, the modern statistics, in particular, the International Statistical Commission of the UN, proposed to divide the factors into primary and secondary.
Of course, the primary factors will remain labor, land, capital, and entrepreneurship.
The secondary factors that are developing at the moment are information, technology, and even state regulation.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that labor is any physical or mental activity of people. Land is natural resources, minerals, water, forest, air, and subsoil.
Capital is, first of all, an accumulated supply of production factors, such as equipment, raw materials. In this case, special attention should be paid to such a production factor as technology.
Often it is considered as a component of the production factor of capital. So, depending on the presence or availability of production factors, countries develop their specialization, organize production activities in their economic territories.
Please look at the slide. Based on the origin of the production factors, we could also divide them into primary and secondary. The primary factors are the natural ones, and the secondary factors are the developed and acquired ones.
Such a division of factors allowed a number of economists to develop the concept of the international competitiveness of nations, which proves that the presence of not only natural, but also developed factors leads to a faster development of the national economy.
Let's take Japan. It does not have a large set of basic natural factors, but it is the leading country in international economic relations precisely because it acquires and develops other production factors around the world.
In terms of specialization, production factors are divided into general and specific. General factors are used in any field of production and are supposed to have a high level of mobility. Such production factors include, for example, a labor cleaner, who does the same kind of activity in any field of the economy.
Specific factors are less mobile, and often not mobile at all, because they imply some special knowledge, special methods of economic activity. Accordingly, in the international economy, such a division into general and specific factors is due to the fact that the income of the owners of specific and general factors is different.
If, for example, the economic sector is developing, focusing on export, and in these sectors people begin to receive higher incomes, then, of course, the owners of specific factors, namely, for example, those oil wells, will receive much higher incomes than the owners of general factors, namely, engineers, those who do not have any special qualifications,
and those very cleaners or programmers, who can be used in absolutely different areas of economic activity. Thus, the development of these groups of factors leads to the development of the international division of labor, that is, a stable concentration of production of specific types of products in certain countries.
The international division of labor implies the existence of its second half, the development of international cooperation of production. But international cooperation of production does not necessarily develop as a result of the development of the international division of labor. What is this connected with?
Suppose a less developed country specializes in the production and even the collection of local fruits. Then, in principle, the cooperation of production of fruits is not needed. It is engaged in this production for its own consumption and it is unlikely that these fruits can be exported at all.
The process of cooperation still implies a fairly high level of industrial development and begins to develop only when, as a result of this cooperation, companies acquire certain technological advantages.
An example of such international cooperation is, say, the development of the industry of the production of ready-made clothes. Look, our domestic manufacturers no longer produce in our factories and factories, do not sew clothes in Russia.
Technologies are being developed, models are being developed in Russia, production is being organized in China as a cheaper option, and now it is being distributed and implemented again in Russia. Thus, international cooperation helps to save the limited resources that are in society and to effectively organize production.
If we pay attention to the scheme of interconnection of types of labor division, then this scheme reflects the processes of the development of the international division of labor.
Initially, the international division of labor was developed as a national or regional division of labor, and over time, companies began to specialize in the production of goods for export, and thus the international division of labor was formed.
What is the peculiarity of the modern international division of labor? It is represented in the world in such forms as general, private and individual. What does this mean?
On the one hand, the international division of labor can be general in large areas of production, private, specialized in industries and sub-industries, and individual, inter-company.
Special attention is paid to the development of the single, inter-company division of labor, because international transnational corporations organize the production process in such a way that the entire production cycle is not organized in one country, but is distributed in a number of countries, depending on where the production factors are cheaper.
Thus, the modern international division of labor at the level of the single can be represented in such forms as detailed and operational.
Imagine, the technology of production of ready-made clothes in the United States is being developed, and in adjacent countries, border areas, for example, clothes are made in the open, and in another country, clothes are made by sewing sleeves and pockets, or buttons. Thus, companies highlight the most rational solutions to these problems.
Thus, if you look again at the scheme for the development of the international division of labor, then the process of international specialization goes in such a way that initially countries specialize in the commercial version of labor division,
and commercial specialization involves the creation of ready-made products, a fully completed production cycle in one country.
The detailed division of labor involves the export of components and assembly in some regions of the world where the production process is cheaper, and even operational.
In particular, the operational division of labor would be organized by such operations as management and marketing in one of the countries.
Now, as for the issue of international cooperation of labor, it can only develop when such processes as coordination of economic activities of enterprises of partners from different countries are developed,
and when the rhythm of their activities is assumed. In modern conditions, the achievement of international management is the development of JIT systems, which assumes that the connections between companies are at such a high level that the delivery of components is made on time,
in the period of 15-20 minutes. Such an organization of the production process is typical of highly developed, technologically equipped companies.
The main forms of cooperation exist in the world now. This is primarily subordinate cooperation related to the delivery of raw materials, components, joint production.
In this case, this is a higher level of development of international cooperation and assumes the development of programs that combine resources and distribute responsibility between partners.
And the contractual specialization, which assumes the development of such connections between competing companies that they agree not to develop and produce the same types of products, but, on the contrary, to organize joint production that would meet the needs of both competing companies.
The most developed forms of cooperation in the modern world are integrated cooperation. In this case, it is assumed that companies implement modern logistics techniques.
The organization of the production process, trading, transportation is based on computer technologies and processes are tracked in real time. Such an integrated approach gives the most significant effect when using the very limited production factors.
The stages of the development of international economic relations are associated with three significant components. First of all, this is the formation of the world market.
The next stage is the formation of the world economy. The last modern stage is related to the formation of the international economy.
Look at the diagram. Evolution of the forms of the market. If we imagine three countries that are associated with significant international economic relations, each circle is a national market.
The upper part of the diagram shows the segment of the market that is associated with the domestic market. In this case, it is assumed that the manufacturers meet the needs of domestic demand and do not produce goods for international relations, for international sales.
The international market is the development of a special segment of the market, a part of the national economy that will be directly associated with foreign markets.
In general, all three countries are included in the world market, that is, the sphere of stable trade and monetary relations between countries, based on the international division of labor.
The development of the world market and the world economy was quite rapid in various periods of time. The formation of the world market dates back to the 16th century.
The era of great geographical discoveries helped to develop international trade relations, and the formation of the world market in that period helped to develop the market economies of the countries of the world.
The formation of the world market ended, as economists believe, somewhere at the end of the 19th century, at the beginning of the 20th century. And at the beginning of the 20th century, the world economy began to form.
And in this case, the main criterion for the formation of the world economy is not only the emergence of international trade as a form of international economic relations, but also the emergence of the movement of production factors between countries, and the emergence of the activity of such new economic subjects as transnational corporations.
The formation of the world economy, as I said, is happening at a modern stage, and we will definitely consider the features associated with this stage of development.
Now let's look at how international trade developed in Russia. In ancient Russia, the emergence of stable international trade relations can be attributed to the 11th-12th centuries, although some trade relations also developed in the 8th-9th centuries.
And if you look at the construction of ancient Russian cities, then the center of each city was the market, the market, and a special layer of people, intermediaries of those very merchants was formed.
The ancient definition of the class of intermediaries is quite interesting. Look, Prasol is an intermediary of the Aptovik. Accordingly, he organized the production process in such a way that he bought salt, honey, wax, concentrated them in some warehouse centers, and then resold them to smaller economic intermediaries.
Athenia is the same small intermediary, a carabiner, who travels to different cities and cities and sells small goods for the end consumer.
A merchant is an intermediary between the manufacturer and the consumer, and in this case, he can make deals between manufacturers if they trade raw materials.
Goist is a merchant trading with other countries. Thus, we see that in ancient Russia, international trade developed at a fairly high pace.
So, the main features of the world market. First of all, it performs such important functions.
First of all, it performs such important functions. In the conditions of international competition, companies that are not able to redistribute existing limited resources more effectively, use them more effectively, eventually go bankrupt.
It performs an informational function. It is on the world market that education takes place, and world prices are revealed, which the national manufacturer is focused on.
It should be noted that the world market is under the influence of not only internal demand, but also external demand. We have found out that some sectors, economies of a number of countries are directly oriented to export or import relations.
So, the main flows that exist on the world market are export and import. Export is the export of goods from a country. It should be noted how the value of export is assessed.
The value of export is calculated at the so-called FOB price, or the franc-border of the exporter's country. It is assumed that all costs for its production and transportation are included in the price of the export goods.
As for import, which is assumed to be the export of goods from a country, it is calculated at the prices of the FOB, or the franc-border of the exporter's country. Thus, international transports across the oceans, air transport, these costs are included in the price of the import goods.
Only at the time of the crossings of the national economic border, the costs associated with the production and transportation of imports are fully calculated.
I would also like to draw your attention to the fact that the volume of goods exported from a country is included in the export. What does this mean?
When international exhibitions are organized, the samples presented at these exhibitions cross the border, for a while they are in the territory of the so-called country of the importer, and then return.
This is the volume of re-export, which is also included in the volume of export. In this case, with the option of international division of labor and international cooperation,
if, for example, some foreign company brought goods to the territory of our country, which was subsequently subjected to substantial processing, then just after this processing, the goods are included in the domestic production.
And after such a substantial processing, it is returned to foreign countries. This is also a re-export option, but associated with substantial processing.
The most common indicators are the sales and trading turnover, which is the difference between export and import, or the trade balance, as well as the external trade turnover or the amount of export and import.
Accordingly, if in a country export exceeds import, then this is a positive trade balance. If, on the contrary, import, which is less desirable, exceeds export, then in this country there is a negative trade balance.
Ideally, all countries try to balance their international trade and achieve a balanced trade balance.
The indicators of the inclusion of countries in the world economy, in the world economy, developed by international organizations, are export quotas, import quotas and the openness index.
The export quota shows the share of the export value of the domestic product, expressed in percentages. The import quota is the import value, respectively, related to the GDP value, also expressed in percentages.
The openness index is also interesting. It shows the value of the external trade turnover in relation to the GDP. If we take the developed and developing economies, how to characterize how much the country is included in the world economy, international economic relations,
as practice shows, the high openness index is characteristic of mainly small countries, with a small volume of foreign trade, with a small territory, with a small population and so on.
Large countries, despite being strongly involved in export-import relations, their external trade turnover does not take up such a significant share of the GDP. If we take the USA, the export-import quotas and the openness index are approaching 20%.
Russia is at the same level. On the other hand, if we take some small countries of the European Union, their openness index may exceed 100%. If we take the economies that are territorially on transit routes and transit passes through them,
these economies will have an openness index, especially in the export quota, reaching about 150-170%.
What are the characteristics of the development of the world economy, the world economy and the international economy? Pay attention to the diagram. As I said, the first stage of the world market development is the 16th-19th centuries.
Accordingly, by the end of the 19th-early 20th centuries, there were stable external economic relations, stable trade between the leading countries. The second stage is the world economy, again, the 19th-early 20th centuries.
The main difference is that stable exchange of production mobile factors, namely, the exchange of labor and capital, has been added to international trade. International forms of production have appeared in the territories of various countries of the world.
In this case, it is assumed that the use of international cooperation in production and the distribution of individual links of the technological process between countries is being done.
Design in one country, assembly and production in some other countries, and final packaging and sale in another country. At the same time, special forms of international economic agents appear, these are transnational corporations.
International monopolies, according to the approach of international organizations, are divided into transnational corporations and international corporations.
Transnational corporations assume that the origin of capital belongs to one country. And, in principle, it can be a transnational corporation of the United States or a transnational corporation of Germany.
Usually, the headquarters of such transnational corporations are located in the country whose name, the flag of which, this company assigns to itself. Why do transnational corporations, although they use capital from all over the world, since they are usually shareholder companies, still adhere to the attachment to one or another national economy as such?
This is due to the fact that usually the state is interested in the development of its transnational corporations, since they receive significant tax revenues from them.
Transnational corporations spread the idea of the value of the country, the capital, which is associated with the origin of one or another country, all over the world.
The next stage is the second half of the 20th century, the third stage of the development of the international economy. What is the difference between the international economy and the previous stages of the world market and the world economy?
The modern international economy includes the development of the world market and all the features of the world economy. But here there are new, unique features.
Modern computerization of production and not only production of services allowed the development of international financial relations to such an extent that modern international finance has become a separate part of international economic relations.
The Internet of Finance, international trade, international exchanges, and the Internet of Exchange represent the independent sphere in the development of international economic relations. Of course, this is a special feature of the third stage of the development of the international economy.
The next feature of the modern stage is the development of state-level international economic relations based on the development of modern supranational institutions of various international organizations.
An example of this is the development of the World Trade Organization, the development of the International Financial Institute, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund.
It is assumed that on the basis of the activities of such institutions, there is a mutual regulation, the elimination of conflicts, the elimination of controversial issues that help to develop modern international economic relations.
The next topic is the balance in the international economy. In principle, the situation of balance in economic theory was considered at the level of either one market, one commodity market, or in the framework of macroeconomics.
And then there was an ideal situation when demand is equal to supply for some kind of product, or in the territory of the national economy, the total demand of the country is equal to the total supply.
It was assumed that at this moment there was no overproduction, no underproduction of goods, and consumers and producers were completely satisfied with the level of prices that were set on this product or territorial, international market.
How does the balance and the simplest price formation scheme on the world market work? In this case, when we consider various forms of international economic relations, we say that one of the reasons for export is the creation of excess commodity mass in the country.
And the market then performs some kind of stabilizing functions. We throw those goods into the world market that are not needed in such quantity in the territory of this country, although they are in demand.
On the other hand, import. Import usually covers the shortage of products. The international market performs such stabilizing functions. If national producers are not able to produce at such prices, and consumers still need these goods, we import them.
How then? In this case, we must understand that this is a conditional scheme of such momentary equilibrium as a photo that is put together on the world market. In reality, the world market is never presented as a photo, and real prices are constantly deviated from one side or another from a certain average.
But we can understand the mechanism of the formation of these prices by the scheme that is presented on the slide, which shows the trends of the establishment of world prices and such informal, theoretical balance on the world market.
If we imagine two countries, one country and two countries, and imagine that these are originally completely closed countries, that is, what is called in the theory of autarky, they do not have international trade at all, then, accordingly, on the domestic market, according to this particular model, they have an internal balance.
That is, the demand is completely satisfied by the offer at this price level.
But we can imagine that the price level, for example, in the country 1, for this type of goods is equal to P1. As you can see, this price is relatively lower than the price that is established in the country 2. There, the equilibrium price is higher than P1 and reaches a certain higher level, due to the fact that, apparently, there are higher costs in this country.
In the end, if our borders become open, do not close with some state prohibitions, customs and other barriers, then our domestic manufacturer from the country 1, having goods at a cheaper price, can certainly not even take into account the demand of national consumers, but quickly import this product to the country 2 to sell there more expensively.
At least there the price will be higher than the price that will be in the country 1.
On the other hand, the country 2, which has such high prices, will certainly be glad to buy goods at a price level lower than its national price. Based on this, such inter-country mutual interests of consumers and sellers in different countries lead to the fact that a trade exchange begins.
I do not consider in this simple scheme other reasons for establishing international economic relations. It is enough to say that such low prices in the country 1 may have arisen due to the fact that there is an excess of some production factors, and therefore they have relatively cheap production.
That is why they agree to produce and provide their goods not only to the national economy, but to the whole world. But even if these sellers have purely economic interests, to get a certain increase in profit than they have in the territory of the national economy, even such an incentive still leads to the establishment of an international trade.
As a result, we can consider various consequences of establishing the equilibrium of the development of international trade, consider the sides that have lost and won from the world market. We now have a different task. We must find out how the world price is established.
Thus, it is clear that if such flows continue in the opposite direction, then in the country 2 there will certainly be some other product that will be produced relatively cheaper than in the country 1. And then, even without a currency exchange, but just a simple goods exchange, these countries may agree to exchange these goods with each other.
In modern conditions, of course, there is no need for a natural exchange between countries, there are currency relations, and therefore payments for export and import go in the currency according to the agreement of the parties.
Therefore, there is no need for a balance in the two countries that existed before the establishment of international trade. Also, pay attention to the segment A1-B1, this is the product that will enter the international market.
It is exactly equal to the segment A2-B2 that we have on the chart for country 2. In this case, the export flow must be equal to the import flow.
And when relations are established not only on the basis of one product, it is assumed that the export and import flows are mutually balanced and the principle of trade balance applies.
In one sense, the country gets some amount of import for its export, and on the other hand, pays for its export for import. Based on the principle of trade balance, it turns out that if the countries decided to limit the flow of goods between countries for economic, political reasons, then in the long term, the reduction of their export will lead to a reduction of import, and vice versa.
Because such a natural balance of goods flows still exists.
Of course, in the modern international economy, when the number of counterpartners is large enough, take the WTO members of 150 countries, if you trade with all of them, then this is probably such a multidimensional system for setting prices.
But still, there are some leaders in the commodity groups, and prices are set based on the activities of these counterparties, for example, on international exchanges, or on the basis of price formation related to the activities of large transnational corporations or other large market players.
But what conclusion does this scheme illustrate, which illustrates the establishment of balance and the establishment of the world price?
In this case, the country is interested in improving the conditions of trade, that is, to increase its export prices. It is better to say not even the export prices themselves, but the entire cost of export, that is, in this case, what will mean improving the conditions of trade.
If our export prices grow, while we export the same absolute volume, then the cost of export as a whole increases. Then we will buy more imports at this export cost. Then the price relative to import will significantly decrease.
At the same time, the real prices for imports have not changed, but the relative price expressed in the conditions of trade is changing. And in this case, the conditions of trade are a more natural indicator, not associated with sharp fluctuations around the currency exchange rate, because the conditions of trade can be expressed on the basis of such commodity groups in the currency of the purchasing power.
What are the balancing functions of the world market? First of all, the size of exports is determined by the size of the surplus supply of goods. Maybe this situation does not always happen.
For example, the world market does not allow reproduction in the national economy market, it buys surplus supply for itself. But this does not mean that goods are created on the domestic market that no one needs. And this surplus supply suddenly went to the world market.
It is assumed that if you remember the definition of demand, demand is not just related to the desire to buy, but to the payment capacity of the consumer. If the payment capacity of the consumer is low and he cannot buy all the products offered, then this product can be offered to a richer consumer on the world market.
This is what concerns developing countries, new industrial economies, especially China. From the point of view of the needs of the Chinese population, which has a billion people, all the Chinese export could be absorbed by the domestic economy. But in this case, we are counting on the payment capacity of our consumers.
The size of imports is determined by the size of the surplus supply of goods. It is assumed that if a deficit situation arises, then the price of goods will increase, and the importer will be interested in bringing in this amount of goods.
The next principle is the trade balance. This does not mean that in practice countries must absolutely establish the situation when the cost of export is equal to the cost of import.
This is a positive trend, but at least the negative trade balance can be tolerated only to a certain level. If this is a long-term trend, then if we buy a lot of goods by import, but do not pay for export, and export is in a shortened volume, then we are debtors.
We have to borrow and borrow to buy the same volume of import that we want to buy. Therefore, the conclusion from the principle of the trade balance is that any limitation of import ultimately leads to a limitation of export.
Based on this, the principle of the second best is probably in effect, when liberalization and international trade are not associated with any restrictions, but rather than international trade within certain restrictions.
Because in this case, international competition allows the national and global markets to supply the product that is produced with the most effective techniques and with the most rational use of production factors.
International trade is also associated with the international mobility of production factors. If we take the economic territory of the domestic economy, then on the domestic territory, between cities, villages, agricultural areas,
we can say that the absolute mobility of production factors is ideal. Except for Russia, whose territorial expanses are such that for some production factors these territories are barriers.
But for the international economy, the mobility of production factors is limited primarily by the country's barriers and the territorial location of these countries.
Let's take Russia as an example. In Russia, the migration flow of the working population has increased, and even the displacement of the population has increased.
But this tells us that the average external mobility of the working population is quite high, but the internal mobility is quite low. Because in January-April 2007, the number of migrants within Russia increased by 9.5%, and international migration increased by 54.5%.
Based on this, the migration growth is influenced by various administrative factors, state regulation factors, but it still takes place. Migrants are moving from foreign territories to Russia, although foreign migration has decreased in recent years.
The example of migration in Russia was given because, depending on how much the production factors are moving, they can be specific only for the territory of the national economy, or these are factors that allow to create these goods on any territory.
Based on this, two groups of goods are selected, tradable and non-tradable. In the end, the tradable goods are easily moved between countries due to trade relations, and it is assumed that if some production factors are not mobile, then they are replaced by export or import of goods.
If some factors are mobile, then this production can be organized abroad. Non-tradable goods are used only in the country where they are produced. In this case, the examples of non-tradable goods are primarily related to the infrastructure of the country, with a number of services.
Non-tradable goods do not participate in international exchanges, which does not mean that there is no demand for them at all, but they are limited by their own quality of domestic demand, and therefore are sold only on national territories.
Accordingly, the price for tradable goods is determined based on domestic demand and world demand, practically according to the system that we have already considered when setting the world price. But the price for non-tradable goods is set only due to domestic demand and supply.
When creating non-tradable goods, some production factors can be used that are mobile enough and that have become more expensive in the world. Let's take the energy carriers. And then it turns out that the final price of non-tradable goods, at least the price of the offer, will depend on the world prices.
On the other hand, in this case, prices are taken on which not costs affect, but prices of equilibrium in the domestic market, that is, prices that affect only demand and prices that affect only the number of offers and, in general, some internal costs associated with this offer.
Please look at the following slide at the examples of tradable and non-tradable goods. This division is conditional. First of all, such types of products as agricultural products are certainly tradable goods.
The production of mining industries, the processing of industry is certainly one of the normal examples of tradable goods. But non-tradable goods are, first of all, utility services, construction, wholesale and retail trade in a given territory, because it is connected with a given territory, with a given demand, transportation, storage, communication, financial intermediaries.
However, in relation to the sixth sub-item, it would be possible to argue, because in modern conditions, when transport services are developed, then often transport services are provided by international transnational logistics companies. And then it turns out that transportation is already a tradable product as such.
Nevertheless, given that transportation occurs on the territory of a given national economy, it could be said that the features of a given national economy affect its prices very much. And, in the end, this product can be non-tradable if the transportation is too far away.
Based on this, it turns out that the second item becomes non-tradable not because it is defective or it has no demand at all, then, in principle, it is not a product, but some factors affect it due to the fact that it is not available for the global market.
But if you imagine that it will be necessary to export them and bring them to Europe, then, most likely, the costs of transportation of this product will remain quite high. And, based on this, this group of goods, based on transport costs, will be attributed to non-tradable.
Non-tradable goods are also associated with a group of goods that are associated with public and state services, that is, defense, social services, education, healthcare, public work. In this case, it is assumed that this is just the free social block that is guaranteed regardless of the level of income of all citizens of this national economy.
Of course, we can imagine that we have sections of paid medicine, and then foreigners come to our territory and receive paid services. Thus, the education service turns into a tradable one.
But, again, we can say that they receive services on the territory of our country, we do not export this service abroad, but imagine an exchange of teachers, and then our teacher abroad provides a tradable education service on the foreign territory.
Therefore, the division is quite relative, but the main criterion for social services is that they are necessarily presented to all citizens at the expense of budgetary funds, and therefore non-citizens of the country are no longer allowed to this type of goods and services.
Various communal and social services are also associated with this group. Of course, let's assume the services of a hotel. Again, a relative example, because if we consider that modern tourism covers the hotel complex, then within the framework of international tourism services, the hotel complex also turns into a tradable product.
Nevertheless, in this case, we need our examples to show how in the future tradable goods affect the overall international price education, how they affect the consequences for the country associated with the growth of international prices, with the development of trade.
In particular, the Dutch disease is associated with the fact that tradable goods, export goods, can increase in price, drag into their sector of the economy, these very limited resources, and then the sector of non-tradable goods, which is associated with national consumption and production, will suffer.
The conditions for trade, if we summarize, are associated with transport costs, trade barriers, prohibition of export of goods for political or economic reasons, and, of course, technical progress.
Technical progress is not a trade barrier, but a positive factor, because in connection with technical progress, for example, the availability of goods in some economic territories increases, and, accordingly, the products produced in these territories become tradable goods.
Now, as for a more specific issue, the prices that are set in a more specific sphere of international economic relations in terms of trade. First of all, these are wholesale prices for industrial products, prices for construction products, purchasing prices, freight and passenger transport tariffs, retail prices, tariffs for payment services to the population, prices for service, foreign trade turnover.
As you can see, the prices for service and foreign trade turnover are only one of the types of prices that exist on the national market and participate in the overall system of price production in the territory of this national economy.
If we look at this in more detail, then the wholesale prices can be both international and international. The price at which the enterprise implements the products is the price at which the enterprise implements the products for the consumer.
Accordingly, it is assumed that the wholesale price of the enterprise is the price that is set for the goods that are purchased from the warehouse of the enterprise that produces this product.
But the wholesale price of the industry is a more moderate price. This price is due to the fact that this price is paid by the manufacturer to the enterprise, and, accordingly, some taxes will be introduced here, and, perhaps, transport costs, depending on the terms of the contract.
Purchasing prices are the prices at which agricultural products are produced. In this case, the state acts as an economic agent. But these purchasing prices under state contracts, when distributing tenders, applications for state supplies, may concern not only domestic manufacturers, but also foreign ones.
The purchasing price is a real price for wholesale and retail supplies of various types of agricultural products.
The wholesale price is the price at which the goods are implemented in retail trading by enterprises and organizations for the population. And the wholesale price is the highest price, compared to all other medium, small, and large prices.
Why? Because all taxes on the added value will be introduced, all transport costs, and additional services that each of the contractors provided for our products to come from the manufacturer to the end consumer.
Prices by the degree of state regulation can be divided into free and fixed prices. This division is relevant for international economic relations, since the state, being a free economic agent, can also, having state property, produce certain prices of goods and services, and, accordingly, fix prices for some product.
Free prices are, of course, due to the demand for the supply on the global market.
We should also address the marketing approach to price education, which is related to the activities of international companies, both medium and large.
For example, the brand prices. What are they related to? They are related to the policy of large companies, such as the policy of draining the plums. It is assumed that this company has already recommended itself on the international market as a high-quality manufacturer, producing a sufficient number of consumers, and then these brand prices are quite high.
The only way to lower the brand price is to give the right to use the brand and the name of the company to produce goods on their territory. Then, perhaps, these prices will be somewhat reduced.
Nevertheless, brand prices are also related to the orientation of the demand for a certain type of goods, which is prestigious, and then the consumer is ready to overpay for some types of products, despite the fact that, it would seem, the international market should lead to the price of these goods being somehow balanced and reduced compared to those prices that exist on the separate national markets.
Further, the price education can be used to differentiate prices. When large companies, companies that have a certain brand, their trademark, which is called a brand, they try to break the level of income of all consumers in one region or another, where they export,
and offer them different prices for almost the same product. Then there is a class of price economy, a class of premium, a business class. Although companies prove that the quality of these goods is somewhat diverse, but from the point of view of the clean costs of the company that carries the company for the creation and transportation of this product,
they are much lower than those prices that are set for the premium class.
Another policy of large international companies, because otherwise they will not affect the global market, is a policy related to the policy of market capture, a policy of damping prices.
It is assumed that companies develop a strategy in advance, by which they lower the prices of the products that are offered for this particular market. Often, pay attention, for example, according to the gray scheme, goods are imported to Russia, which were supposed to be imported to some third countries.
Why? Because the prices of these goods are lowered according to the purchasing power of those countries that should accept these goods. But, according to the purchasing power of Russian consumers, the prices should be slightly higher.
This is also an option of hidden damping, but due to the gray schemes. Maybe this is why countries are fighting with such a process when damping is open, especially members of the World Trade Organization.
There is always a state mechanism, state measures that will try to punish the company and prove that if it really imports goods at damping prices, then this is an unfair and imperfect competition and it can be punished.
Thus, we come to the issue of the types of world prices. These prices are classified according to the payment system. Then the prices for trade deals with payments are obtained in freely convertible currency.
As you understand, freely convertible currency is a fairly solid currency, so probably these prices can be made a little lower. Prices for trade deals with payments in non-convertible currency, of course, for insurance from the risks of fluctuating this currency, probably the prices will be slightly higher.
Prices for clearing agreements are assumed to be a kind of barter exchange. That is, as a result of various transactions, the difference in the export-import flow is calculated and the country that was the recipient pays this debt.
Prices for non-trade transactions are assumed to be transactions related to donations, economic assistance. They should also be present. Why? Because imagine that the Ministry of Emergencies provides goods to a country in which there is an earthquake, and goods cross the border.
This border is crossed by goods, it must be covered. And then prices for non-trade transactions arise. Of course, these are prices that should be as low as possible so that the country that provides such economic assistance is not affected.
Transfer prices, inter-company prices, are another option of international prices. They are related to the activities of transnational corporations. Transnational corporations understand that if their enterprises are located in different countries of the world, then if they give each enterprise the opportunity to write the highest price, then the total costs will be huge.
And then they develop a reverse policy. They calculate such transfer prices that cover the costs of the company that creates them. And maybe some other average profit. Why? Because the distribution of financial income is based on the calculated averages of the unit of invested capital between these companies.
Transfer prices are a very interesting area of international economic relations, which in developed countries should be regulated. Why? Because it is related to taxes, international flows, and the national taxation of goods that pass through transfer prices.
If the state is involved in the expansion of its transnational corporations, it will be eyeing transfer prices, as well as the fact that the main taxes will be paid by these firms in offshore zones.
For example, the United States. Despite the well-developed legislation, the international transnational companies use this mechanism and do not pay taxes to the US government. This measure is a measure of stimulating export transnational companies.
This struggle for the future of the transnational corporations is connected with the struggle of globalists, or rather, anti-globalists. When there are discussions within the framework of the World Trade Organization, representatives of the European Union of Developing Countries say,
you are encouraging your transnational corporations, you are stimulating them artificially, you have a hidden stimulation of export due to these transfer prices and due to the removal of taxation in the offshore zone.
In response, the United States says to Europe, you are stimulating and supporting your agricultural producers. Why? Because 50% of the budget of the EU is directed to direct stimulation of agricultural producers.
They pay the difference between the price of production costs and the cheaper price at which they can sell these goods on the world market. Thus, summing up the discussion of transfer prices, it can be determined that they are used when supplying semi-barricades, nodes, parts, components.
As a rule, they are a subject of commercial secrecy, they are used by international associations, various transnational corporations and their branches, which are located in various countries of the world.
Now, as for the prices that are set directly in the contract, that is, contract prices. In principle, there can be different methods in the contract. If you have a one-time supply, then you may have a hard fixation of prices in the contract.
If you have a supply for a longer period, then you may expect some currency jumps, inflation jumps. And if so, then the hard price is no longer set, it is tied to some principle, maybe to the currency exchange rate of some hard convertible world currency, but nevertheless the price becomes more flexible.
If there is a further fluctuation of market prices for some product, then it may be that the companies conclude a general contract, and with each pre-supply, the price will be specified separately during this period of time. Thus, the price that will be obtained will be a contract price with an adjustment to the fluctuations of the current market prices.
Another type of price is a sliding price, which depends on the costs. Such a contract price is certainly associated with the provision of international construction services.
And when a company won a tender for the construction of complexes, then in the process of creating such a service as the construction of a shopping center, it may eventually incur costs due to the price of raw materials. Based on this, a sliding price is set in the contract, depending on the costs.
Accordingly, there may be an intermediate option of a mixed price, when part of the price is rigidly fined, and the other part has a sliding nature, depending on the factors specified in the contract.
Another component of the contract, which is associated with the word price, is the currency of price. The currency in which the price is set for a product in the contract is called the currency of price. In some cases, the currency of price can even be specified in a series of currencies.
The currency of payment is the currency in which the importer's obligation will be paid. And the currency of payment is indicated in the most stable currency, assuming that the supplier will not lose any currency from the fall of the currency exchange rate.
Therefore, the process of price formation can be quite schematic.
Now let's move on to the next topic of our course, which is the modern development of international economic relations.
In modern conditions, the traditional forms of the EU, such as foreign trade, the migration of capital, and currency relations, are developing at the same rapid pace as in the past.
Nevertheless, a number of other forms have appeared and have taken their place in the international economic relations system. Pay attention to the slide.
The international integration processes have been added to the international migration of labor. The development of transnational corporations and international credit and financial institutions has taken place.
At a rapid pace, the interstate regulation of international economic relations is developing. The international financial institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund, have taken on a special role.
Let's briefly describe these forms. What are the reasons for the growth of international trade in goods and services? Why does international trade not lose its position in the world?
First of all, this is a traditional reason for the development of the international division of labor, as we have already noted, not only at the level of commodity, but also at the level of operational, detailed division of labor, when certain types of activities or components are created around the world, and then brought to the final product in a second or third country.
The next component is the development of national production and exchange. As soon as the national economy stabilizes in its development, the internal demand for the manufacturers' companies, the internal market becomes tight, and they begin to offer their goods and services to the international market.
And given that there are customs barriers in countries, or some other external trade barriers, they begin to develop their national production to the international level, transferring production activities to countries where the use of cheap resources is more effective.
The next reason for the development of international trade is the uneven development of individual production industries.
The next reason for the development of the trans-market economy is the tendency to constantly expand production in order to obtain profit.
Any company, even if it sets some social goals for the satisfaction of consumers, nevertheless, it has a definite economic goal to maximize profits with existing resources.
Therefore, the constant expansion of production is a natural tendency to develop any economy with a market relationship.
Let's look at the geographical structure of international trade. Of course, the main suppliers and importers of goods on the world market are developed countries.
This is due to the fact that the level of income of end consumers and the level of income of industrial consumers is quite high, and they have a high demand potential.
Therefore, if we use the marketing term, the potential of the market is quite high in developed countries, and, of course, some new products are offered to such developed consumers in such economies.
The second component of the international trade is the growth of the individual weight of developing countries. Indeed, as shown in our list, the growth of the individual weight of developing countries is taking place.
This is due to the fact that earlier less developed economies, still, in the framework of the development of trade relations and the development of market relations, replenish their production capabilities and engage not only in export, but also in import to the world market.
The next factor affecting the development of international trade is the growth of the share of countries in the transition economy. Pay attention to the split. In this case, it is the account of the current operations in different groups of countries.
As you can see, in the United States, the account of the current operations is negative, which means that import is higher than export. And in the leaders is China, it has a fairly high account of the current operations.
But if you look at other countries in the world, it turns out that other developing countries have a positive balance sheet of trade and, accordingly, a positive account of the current operations.
Thus, this picture confirms that developing countries are beginning to win more and more share in foreign trade. This is facilitated by economic growth in a number of developing countries, which is confirmed by the following slide.
The percentage of real GDP changes in developing countries, as you can see, has a tendency to constant growth. The tendency to growth in foreign trade in developing countries is confirmed by the pace of economic growth in these countries. Pay attention to the slide.
Accordingly, the World Bank analysts conducting research on the group of developing countries prove that this tendency reflects the globalization tendency in the economy.
Developing countries, which have rebuilt their economy and began to develop export-oriented industries, have created a tendency to favorable economic growth.
The following slide shows us the statistics of the share of developing countries in the export of developed countries.
Of course, the leaders of foreign trade are still developed countries. But look, for example, in the earlier period, the share of developing countries was only 22% of the share of developed countries.
But since the last few years, in the 2000s, it is already about 45% of the total level of foreign trade in developed countries. This suggests that the tendency is positive and developing countries are changing their position in the world economy and are taking more and more stable positions.
Of course, this tendency does not apply to groups of poorly developed countries, which have minimal participation in international trade, so-called low-income countries.
But in this case, the indicators that we have here refer to the countries that have carried out industrialization, the so-called new industrialized countries, including China.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that China is the leader in the current conditions of the world trade in terms of growth rates, but the level of income of the population of one country or another, the population, just determines which group will be related to developed or developing countries.
Look at the next slide. Here are examples of developing countries, Vietnam and India. Vietnam has recently begun to develop industries related to the production of light industry in the factories of this country and is included in the world integration processes at the level of such detailed or operational division of labor.
And the income of the population of Vietnam, GDP per capita, is quite low, which allows Vietnam to be considered a low-income country. This is only $ 822 per capita.
If we take India, the level of income per capita is slightly higher, but also quite low. Now let's pay attention to China.
I have already said that China is rapidly developing an export-oriented sector due to significant capital investments in the southern regions of the country, an industrial enclave, focused on international consumer demand.
The level of income per capita is already $ 2,000, even more than $ 2,000, which shows that the group of developing countries is quite diverse, but China is still among the developing countries.
Although, analyzing its rapid foreign economic activity, China says that they cannot be called catching up with the economy, because they lead in growth, in the development of the internal product, in the growth of export and import.
Although, the current programs in the national macroeconomy make the pace of rapid growth slightly lower, because the rate of growth is maintained at the level of 19%, but the export is 26% in 2003, a little bit of export in 2007, 19%, and nevertheless, these are quite high indicators.
Thus, China, being a serious competitor to developed countries in the international trade market, remains the leader in foreign trade, but so far it is a developing country.
For comparison, the level of GDP per capita for the country to become a group of medium-developed countries should be about $ 6,000.
For comparison, the level of GDP per capita for the developed countries of the United States is about $ 45,000.
Of course, the United States is not the leader in this respect, but the pace of economic growth is at 2% for the growth of GDP, and at 5-6% for export and import.
In general, the pace of foreign trade and the development of foreign trade in developed countries is much lower than that of developing countries.
For example, the new market economy can serve Russia, and despite the fact that we are a large country in terms of territory and economy, the growth indicators of large industrial countries are usually small enough,
but in comparison with the 2% that we have just seen in the United States, the growth of GDP is at 8-6%.
Accordingly, both export and import have a fairly dynamic pace of development, from 6% to 15%.
The tendency is that in the last three years our pure export has suddenly begun to decrease due to the fact that, as a result of the Central Bank's estimates, the ruble price is increasing,
and, accordingly, our companies and economic agents in the form of households are able to buy and purchase more goods and services for the existing ruble.
That is why in recent years we have seen an increase in certain imports compared to exports. Nevertheless, the balance of payments in Russia is positive, and such a tendency does not threaten the payment capacity of the country, its currency exchange rate and trade balance.
What is the trade structure of foreign trade for all countries?
I would like to emphasize that it is for all countries, because the global demand will be dictated by developed countries.
And if even developing countries, such as China, are trying to develop their exports, then the main consumers for China are developed countries.
Based on this, the flows to developed countries, the flows of supply of goods will come from the structure of demand that is adopted in developed countries.
Look, three quarters of the production is the processing industry, while the equipment and transport are occupied by half of this group.
The next subgroup is chemistry, black colored metals. This subgroup is also dominant and, therefore, supplements the equipment and transport.
To a lesser extent, the production of the processing industry is associated with the movement of the light industry, but textile is still one component of the global trade.
And one quarter of the foreign trade flows fall on raw materials and food.
Such a ratio of processing products and raw materials indicates that countries that develop their foreign trade based on raw materials or food supply have some economic growth limitations,
because the demand for raw materials and food is stable and, as economists say, it is not elastic in price.
That is, even if prices fall for this commodity, the demand for raw materials and food will not increase sharply.
There is a certain level of consumption.
But the demand for equipment, for various modifications of its appearance, can be overshadowed by the technical progress.
And, accordingly, new goods or services will always be offered, which will allow consumers to pay attention to them and eventually purchase.
Therefore, if a country is trying to join the modern world economy, if a country is trying to win certain positions in this world economy and not be only a raw material addict,
and, accordingly, depend on world prices, then it must definitely try to increase the share of the processing industry.
Then it has a chance to become a more developed market economy with, say, a transition economy.
The general trend of the pace of growth of world trade is that the pace of growth of foreign trade for a long enough period,
probably for about 50 years, exceeds the pace of growth of industrial production.
This is precisely due to the fact that, as I said, the detailed and operational division of labor
makes it possible to organize such flows as the flow of components, some semi-finished products, which are collected in third countries.
And another trend that we talked about is the pace of growth of trade in developing countries is higher than the pace of growth of trade in developed countries.
What are the reasons for export-oriented development of certain countries, and, in particular, the reasons for export-oriented development,
which are chosen by developing countries?
The so-called new industrial countries of the first and second wave, which, based on their macroeconomic policy,
in the 1960s, set the development of export-oriented world demand for industries,
their activity shows that they have won in such a competitive struggle, and their income level for the longer term population, i.e., GDP for the longer term population, is growing.
What are the reasons for this?
First of all, initially, the internal demand is limited.
Of course, if we look not at the GDP for the longer term population, but at the real income of the population,
the indicator will be several times lower than the GDP.
Accordingly, the internal demand is limited by the purchasing power of the population and does not have such expanded capabilities.
On the other hand, as soon as countries focused on export develop and achieve certain success,
and China is an example of this, then part of the industry can be reoriented to internal demand.
In the strategic projects of China's development, the Chinese government lays down elements of stimulating internal demand,
hoping that the growth of the income level of the population, the real income of the population,
which is also related to the fact that they were engaged in export industries and received higher incomes, higher wages,
will now stimulate further development of the industry.
Such export-oriented economies as China, probably, with the growth of internal demand, will depend less on international demand and international cataclysms.
The next factor of export-oriented development is, of course, the availability of cheap labor resources or other natural resources.
By excess, I mean that the internal industry, the internal production demand does not meet the needs of these resources,
and, most likely, there is a high unemployment.
In this case, one of the methods of getting out of the situation when the industry, which is oriented to the internal market,
does not need so many workers, is the exit of the production, which is oriented only to export and global demand.
The next reason why countries that have chosen export-oriented production get an advantage is, first of all, the possibility of attracting foreign investments.
All new industrial countries have just carried out their industrialization due to the fact that the capital flow from developed countries,
and direct foreign investments, that is, the factories and factories that were on the territory of developed countries,
were limited in their expansion precisely because in developed countries there is no fresh labor flow on the one hand,
and on the other hand, the level of wages and, accordingly, the costs for companies are quite high.
And so, the same example that was already given in the earlier tables, for example, China at the current stage is no longer the cheapest factory in the world,
and the level of income of the population is increasing due to the increase in wages.
But another, for example, a block like Vietnam, where you can organize cheaper production,
and, accordingly, this attracts foreign investors, and from the point of view of a country's profit, this is the acquisition of new technologies.
Moreover, technologies will be associated not only with production processes, but also with new technologies of management and marketing,
which gives the opportunity to transition economies, for example, or developing countries that have recently embarked on the market path of development,
to attract advanced technologies into the organization of production, which can give a kind of a multiplied effect.
What are the consequences of global trade?
On the one hand, it could be said that there are two negative factors,
that is, the increase in dependence on exports and the increase in dependence on imports.
But, in principle, probably for an economy that is developing quite stably, such dependence is not scary.
And we have already said that, for example, for small European countries, the export or import quota is more than 100%.
On the other hand, for large economies with a large national market, such as Russia and the United States, the export quota reaches only 20%,
so the dependence here is relatively high.
The next consequence of the development of global trade is the consequence of a positive nature for consumers of the national economy.
Of course, imports lead to a decrease in domestic prices and an increase in the assortment to satisfy consumer demand.
Another consequence of which, so to speak, national economic agents benefit from is the leveling of the income level of workers.
An example of such leveling of the level of workers can be the Japanese.
In post-war Japan, both national industries focused on national demand and export demand were developing rapidly.
This is because a sufficiently qualified Japanese labor force had a fairly low income level, and, accordingly, a low level of costs for companies.
But if we compare it to the modern period, then such an economic growth has gradually leveled the income level,
and now the income level of the average wage in Japan is higher than in the United States.
Therefore, in general, for developing countries, in the long term, the development of export-oriented production is a positive moment.
The next consequence, as I said, is the development of export-oriented industries, and there is a contradiction here.
And these contradictions are related to the position of the Dutch disease.
I repeat, the Dutch disease is a disproportionate development of export industries,
and within these contradictions, the creation of such a situation, when the income of the owners of the production factors in export industries is much higher than in import-replacing countries.
And the import-replacing countries, the industries, still suffer from the fact that they do not have enough resources,
and, in the end, a certain economic decline in the economy is possible.
And the last effect of the Dutch disease is the increase in the national currency exchange rate.
Again, if the export is developing in large volumes and higher than the import,
then the inflow of foreign currency into the country will ultimately lead to an increase in the national currency exchange rate,
and this national currency will lead to relative increase in its prices for export goods.
And the last consequence of global trade, which I would like to draw your attention to, is integration.
Integration is, of course, a positive process, but it is connected with two trends, which we will talk about a little later.
The consequences are connected with the fact that, on the one hand, the integration unions liberalize foreign trade between countries,
but, on the other hand, the production of a single foreign rate can reduce trade flows with third-party countries,
and this will have negative consequences for global trade.
Nevertheless, the more integration unions are developed, the more countries are included in such integration unions,
the greater the effect of countries involved in it.
The next form of economic foreign trade is international credit relations.
First of all, credit relations, let's say, in the more ancient centuries, in the 16th, 17th, 18th centuries,
arose precisely because foreign trade had to be credited, and therefore the first and most important reason for the development of foreign trade
is, in the end, the development of international credit relations.
The growth of ship capital in the national economy, in the end, reaches such limits that it turns out to be superfluous,
and does not find a profitable sphere of acceptance with the profit margin that the owners of this capital would like to receive in the national economy,
and then it goes beyond the national framework.
The next reason is the introduction of international accounts.
I mean interstate relations.
In this case, if we have a negative trade and a negative payment balance,
then credit relations with countries, both private and state creditors, help countries to balance their financial system.
What are the forms of lending?
First of all, you can consider the forms of lending depending on the flows associated with this lending.
First of all, the forms of lending of exports.
This is shown in the scheme of commercial and bank loans.
Commercial loans are associated with the activities of companies that trade and lend to each other in these processes,
and bank loans are a separate service of the banking sphere for the purpose of trading.
In this case, the forms of such lending can be consumer, sorry,
purchasing contributions issued by the exporter to one or another country, a foreign manufacturer,
ships for goods located within the country, loans for goods and goods documents in the country of export,
and bank loans, again, for loans in the country of the exporter.
Commercial or corporate loans of the importer.
In this case, the forms of such a loan are open credit,
when the exporter writes down the importer's debt, the value of sold and unloaded goods,
and the importer must pay off the loan in the established period.
Vexel loan.
The exporter makes a deal on the sale of goods in a loan and issues a demand to the importer for payment.
Private insurance.
In this case, the insurance of foreign trade relations, insurance companies,
and then the insurance company takes the risks of payment.
State guarantees.
This area is developing especially rapidly in the last 20 years,
and all the most developed countries in the world have state support for stimulating their exports.
And then the state insures not only from economic, but also political risks
that can damage the foreign trade flow.
What is the structure of a bank loan on import?
First of all, this is a loan issued with the agreement of the importer's bank to pay the demand of the exporter.
That is, a loan issued with an acceptance.
The next form is an acceptance-reimbursement loan.
In this case, Vexel is accepted by the bank on the condition of receiving a guarantee on it
from the foreign bank of the importer.
The next form is a direct bank loan to foreign buyers.
It is quite interesting to develop credit lines
when large banks open credit lines for foreign trade transactions
to their permanent clients on export-import relations.
That is, this is a situation when payments are practically immediate.
Factoring.
In this case, the exporter who sold the goods on the condition of a loan
receives a number of services from the factoring company
in the form of acquiring a position, accounting for export requirements,
and making payments.
Leasing.
The transfer of legal property rights to consumers of goods.
But since the right to property in the framework of leasing transactions continues gradually,
the buyer does not have to buy equipment immediately, for example,
when paying leasing payments.
Thus, the payment is postponed.
Compensation transactions.
This form of lending is also developing quite successfully
between stable partners,
especially partners that are associated with contracts on customs goods.
That is, it is assumed that the supplier of raw materials and components
supplies the product on a loan,
and the company in another country, which imports this raw material and components,
in the future pays a share of the finished product for the supply of raw materials and components.
Insurance of multinational contracts.
Of course, such contracts that are associated with multinational corporations
are insured primarily by multinational banks
or national state companies,
since the volume of turnover is large enough, as well as the volume of risk.
Thus, the international loan, as we see,
is divided into three subgroups, private, state, and private-state.
If we have a country that is credited,
there is an interstate loan,
it is assumed that the loan is issued by one government to another.
What funds are used for such lending?
These are funds of the state budget,
or funds of specialized state or semi-state banks,
such as, for example, Vneshtorbank or Sberbank for the Russian Federation,
that is, in addition to the central bank.
When interstate lending is carried out,
it is assumed that all countries of the world are interested in the absence of destabilization of the financial market and financial system.
Therefore, it is more important for them that there are no economic cataclysms in one country or another,
since this country will offer some goods for export,
as well as buy imports from developed or developing countries.
Accordingly, countries interested in the framework of international relations
provide loans at the state level.
In this regard, the table presented on the next slide is an interesting one.
This is the structure of the external debt of the Russian Federation.
As you can see, the debt of the former USSR is 56 billion dollars,
compared to the debt of the former USSR, which was about 140 billion dollars 10 years ago.
We are constantly increasing this debt in a certain structure.
On the other hand, pay attention to the line of the new Russian debt.
It is assumed that the loans at the level of government loans are still profitable,
and not only to the central government, but especially to the regional level,
for example, to the level of Moscow, the subject of the Russian Federation.
Accordingly, these state bodies take loans under their own state programs.
As you can see, the tendency is that on the one hand,
state loans tend to decrease,
and private loans, that is, loans from private banks, tend to increase.
Moreover, private banks or private companies of Russia are in charge of lending on the private banks' line.
The general tendency is that the structure of the external debt is transformed
from the state government external debt to the private external debt of the Russian Federation.
In this regard, countries that lend to the world market
and at the same time take loans on the same world market,
are interested in the coordination of their positions
and in the development of common requirements and schemes for repaying loans.
In this regard, the Paris Club stands out.
In this case, it is an international government institute
that includes more than 20 leading countries in the world.
It was founded in 1956 and the club's task was to restructure the bilateral state debt.
This is taken into account in the mutual flow.
Russia has also been a member of the club since 1997,
because we were not only debtors, which were quite significant at a certain time,
but we were also creditors.
The London Club is a club of private creditors of developed countries
and was created to restructure the debt of developing countries.
Developed countries, due to the placement of securities on the open market,
offer free purchases not only at the expense of state banks, but also private banks.
Based on this, private debts are formed by private creditors.
In this case, the London Club,
in terms of the attitude of those countries that are debtors,
is a more severe organization.
Why? Because if, for example, a state creditor who joins the Paris Club,
can agree to restructure the debt,
roughly speaking, wait or get less interest,
because there is a supranational interest,
and the stabilization of political, not only economic interests,
can affect the adoption of the loan.
But the members of the London Club bought these securities
and credited these countries, debtors,
to get some profit, a percentage, on their securities.
And usually they agree less happily
to restructure the external debt of one or another country,
if it reduces its payment capacity.
Just the increase in the rating of the Russian economy,
according to the estimates of international rating companies,
rose to the level of B+,
due to the fact that we were able to pay off our debts in the last time on time
and completely pay off the debt to the London Club.
Based on this, the trend, so to speak,
although the old debt, new debts, of course,
as you saw in the previous scheme,
are quite possible, they are organized,
since the loan is just an important component of business.
The Tokyo Club.
Not everyone has probably heard of such an organization,
but nevertheless it exists.
It is an international financial debt club,
and it deals with debts in the field of trade.
The Moscow Club was organized by the government of the Russian Federation in 1998
to regulate relations related to the distribution of Russian short-term and medium-term securities to the FED.
The next form of developing international economic relations
is the loans of international organizations.
The goals of these organizations are somewhat different from those loans,
which, for example, commercial banks represent.
Why? Because their main task is to stabilize the economic situation of developed countries.
And therefore, such international organizations as the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank,
by the way, the World Bank and the IMF are the structures of the United Nations.
These structures, their goal is not to make profits,
so usually the interest on these loans,
although they are also required to be paid,
is quite low, and they provide long-term loans
for financing economic programs and certain targeted projects.
In particular, the last loan that Russia received,
well, Russia received it in the near future,
was a targeted program for the World Bank,
related to the development of research and the fight against the SPYD.
International and regional banks are also organizations
that set about the same goals as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
These are European, Asian, African and Inter-American development banks.
They have the name of such a development bank.
Therefore, they support social and economic projects within their continents.
The development of international loans leads to such a situation
that in the end many countries begin to live in debt.
Economists even have a term,
the term of international economists is the debt economy.
But the situation for different countries is different.
On the one hand, the US debt economy, for example,
even received its name in the textbooks of the international economy
as the deficit of the payment balance without tears,
that is, debts without tears.
Look at the diagram.
The US foreign debt in the first quarter of 2006
has already reached more than $10 trillion.
But in this case, it did not have such a sharp impact
on the fall of the US currency rate, for example,
or on any other macroeconomic indicators.
But the Indian foreign debt, for comparison, is only $140 billion.
If you remember, I already mentioned the number 140.
It was once, for example, the value of our Russian foreign debt to the USSR.
For us, it was a very difficult time,
because you need to pay not only debts, but also interest on them.
But the foreign debt of Ukraine is not comparable at all to these indicators.
It's only $50 billion.
But the pace and volume of Ukraine's development is such
that, of course, further involvement in international debt,
these debt obligations, can ultimately lead to the development of Ukraine.
Therefore, the idea of ​​the debt economy is such
that, of course, if you have, in principle, a fairly high economic potential,
and you have accumulated it,
and you have the opportunity to develop your economy in some medium-term plan,
and pay off your debts,
then living in debt for some time is not so dangerous,
including even for the budget.
But if it is a transitional economy, or, moreover, a developing country,
and the world market is not in favor of exporting this developing country,
then the option of the debt economy is dangerous.
Let's remember 1998.
The financial crisis that occurred in Russia at that time
was not only related to the operations with securities,
with the pyramids that the Central Bank and, accordingly,
commercial banks carried out on the GKO-FZ, on securities.
It was also connected with the drop in prices in the world market
for the raw materials that Russia exports.
Namely, the sharp drop in steel prices and the sharp drop in oil prices.
In this version, our debt economy could not cope, could not stand it,
and could not pay off its debts on its own,
and had to undergo a long procedure of settlement
in order to, in the end, restructurize the Russian debt.
But as soon as oil and metal prices went up,
Russia created favorable conditions for paying off its external debts.
Thus, the debt economy for a large, developed country
is really a variant of a deficit without tears.
Moreover, it should be remembered that the US dollar is a currency
that is in the reserves of most countries in the world.
That is, it is used by international investment and banking demand.
Based on this, even direct repayment of one's debts
by turning on the printing press
can be avoided for some time without terrible consequences
for the national economy and for the entire world community.
Nevertheless, such a deficit also requires
a certain management and thoughtful decisions.
An example is the 1970s, when the US,
starting in the 1960s, was solving its social and economic problems
due to the dollar rebound.
And in the end, the bought-up euro-dollars in Europe
plus the rise in oil prices
led to the Bretton Woods crisis
and the collapse of the US dollar
and, accordingly, the crisis in this large and stable economy.
But a stable large economy
comes out of such a terrible situation faster.
And if, for example, in the 1970s the US was in a crisis,
then literally within 90 years
the stable rates of economic growth of about 4%
were held for quite a long time.
That is, a large economy, of course, has more potential.
And, accordingly, there is a greater chance
for a large developed country to live in debt
and be such a deficit economy.
Moreover, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that large countries with a highly developed economy usually have a high-income population, which has a fairly high internal savings.
They also create a certain financial reserve, when you can take the internal debt of the country's population and thereby pay off your debts.
If there is no such savings, take Russia as an example, or even Japan in the late 1990s, when too large debts in the population on payments to loans were not covered by income, but were not associated with large savings on accounts.
This, of course, causes a financial crisis in the national economy.
The next group of relations is associated with such a form of international economic relations as capital withdrawal.
What are the factors of capital withdrawal and why is it intensified?
If we take the rate of economic growth, then, as I said, the rate of foreign trade is higher than the rate of economic growth.
So the rate of capital withdrawal is higher than the rate of foreign trade and higher than the rate of economic growth.
The first reason is, of course, the development of the global market.
Since the withdrawal of capital occurs in different forms, including in conjunction with the organization of foreign production, then, of course, the development of the global market will help with the withdrawal of capital.
The concentration and centralization of capital in national economies leads to the fact that it does not find a worthy profitable application of national territories and, again, goes beyond the country.
Accordingly, the accumulation of ship capital of industrially developed countries, again, contributes to the export of capital.
And on the other hand, there is also an interest of certain countries in the influx of foreign capital.
Because, if you remember, the most developing export-oriented countries are just interested in the influx of foreign capital and foreign technologies.
The next reason for the withdrawal of capital is the overcoming of protectionist barriers.
If we have a fairly rigid system in the country on some commodity nomenclature, on some kind of commodity production, import, how can we bypass this obstacle?
We can organize the assembly on the territory of a given country. And this is the withdrawal of capital, the process of organizing direct investments.
A vivid example of this is the Russian car industry.
Despite the high import barriers on the tariffs for import of foreign foreign products, especially, so to speak, young people, it is just limited.
This tariff is reduced by the fact that many Western firms organized assembly production on the basis of those machine-building car factories that already existed in Russia.
The next reason for the withdrawal of capital is that it is associated with the development of transnational corporations and transnational banks.
Another factor is the military-political aspects.
In principle, the country, including, for example, the United States, is organized by withdrawing capital, organizing economic assistance or with the help of its own transnational corporations.
In fact, it spreads not only economic, but also political influence.
And in this regard, the donor country is interested in the withdrawal of capital to other countries.
And the last factor is that all countries of the world understand what military-political significance the country that organizes its foreign production acquires.
These governments develop a whole system of measures for state support, both for export of capital and for import.
Accordingly, if the country is in a crisis situation and needs development assistance, it will be state support for foreign investments in the territory of its country.
The main forms of capital withdrawal are both direct investments and capital withdrawal in the form of ship capital.
The disadvantages of ship capital are due to the fact that it is invested in securities.
And, accordingly, as soon as the conventure on the stock market, on the securities market, changes, then the owners of these securities, when they are cheapened, immediately try to get rid of them.
And, in general, depending on how they play within their speculative attacks on the increase or decrease in the value of securities,
ship capital in the form of the capital in the form of securities, in portfolio investments, is quite mobile.
That is, it has absolute mobility, and in case of what, there is a flow of hot money from the country that was counting on investing its economy.
Therefore, of course, direct investments are less mobile, and they are beneficial to the country, because the companies that organize direct investments,
they are forced to organize, to be responsible for the production process that they organized in this territory.
And so, to get rid of the market and leave this country, they will need some time.
That is, practically, the investment in the form of direct investments, the only way such capital can go is to sell their factories, which they have already created in this foreign country.
And, in general, it turns out that the result of their activities remains in the national economy.
Therefore, all countries, when they show statistics of international investments,
they always highlight the foreign direct investments and refer to their changes.
Who are the subjects of capital exportation?
The main exporters, of course, are the industrially developed countries or the countries of the Big Seven.
The main importers are developing countries, as well as the states with a transitional economy.
But, of course, since, as we said, investments can overcome some trade barriers, and in general they are connected with different groups of interests,
then, of course, the importers of investments can be developed countries.
In particular, the United States of America is the leading importer of foreign direct investments.
In this case, this situation is associated with the prehistory of relations with Japan.
That is, Japan, having received restrictions on the importation of car equipment in the United States,
in the end, overcame these barriers through the organization of assembly production in the United States,
and through the purchase of a number of enterprises and large companies in the United States.
So, the option of importation of capital not only in developing countries, but also in developed countries is found everywhere.
Pay attention to the following slide.
It shows that the share of foreign private investment in developing countries is growing.
That is, the share of developing countries is growing not only in the framework of international trade, but also in the framework of the flow of private investment.
Of course, this is due to the fact that in order to become a world factory,
any country that has decided to set its strategic goal of developing export-oriented production will attract investors to its side.
And thus, these investments will go to the country in such streams.
The next direction that characterizes one of the forms of international economic relations is international migration of labor.
As you can see, there are a number of terms that define that immigration is the entry of the working population, and migration is the exit of the working population.
Migration balance is also calculated in all countries of the world, probably in the same way as the trade balance.
That is, this is the difference between the people who have entered and those who have left the country.
And the most painful component of international migration of labor is the migration of the working population.
This is because countries that have a good educational system with a rich state subsidy of this system,
but have not been able to provide adequate jobs to their workers,
are forced to make peace with such economic migration,
when people leave, focusing on higher incomes and organizing their jobs in the relevant qualifications
in developed countries or in more developed countries of the world.
In this case, not only, for example, former socialist countries complain about the migration of the brain,
which really survived such a global outflow of competent, highly qualified population from countries.
But the migration of the brain is also associated with developed countries.
When there was such a more vigorous integration of the USA and Canada,
all radio stations in Canada talked about the outflow of brains from Canada,
because the level of income in the USA for similar specialties is much higher.
Or Israel, again, the outflow of brains in the USA, as for the territory, more economically acceptable for migrants.
Re-migration is the return of migrants to their homeland.
Is there such an outflow in reality?
Yes, in principle, not everyone adapts to the cultural environment,
not only the economic one, which is in the country of departure.
And on the other hand, the growth of stability, economy,
the decrease of inflation, growth of income, population,
leads to the fact that those immigrants who have not found an adequate place or adequate work abroad,
they return to their homeland.
The reason for migration, first of all, is the workforce,
there is a fairly high mobility of the workforce in the country, that is, the mobility of the workforce.
In this case, Russia is an exception in some respects,
because it has a low internal mobility of the workforce.
Maybe this is due to the huge territories of Russia and the complexity,
let's say, of workers from the Far East,
who now have to come to work in the central European part of Russia,
precisely because of road costs.
Or the second reason, of course, is the national feature with low mobility of the workforce.
In this case, this mobility can be increased only through state programs,
and thus somehow revive the market change of the workforce through its own resources.
As for the external mobility of the workforce, it is quite high.
As you know, a sufficient number of workers move to us from the Middle East, primarily from the Asian region.
In this case, pay attention to the slide I have suggested.
Statistics show that our flows are changing here,
and the natural population decline is replaced by migration growth at some specific stage.
But I want to draw your attention to the fact that, for example, in 2000 or 2003,
migration growth was replaced by only 3-4% of the natural population decline.
In 2007, there was a sharp jump,
and migration growth increased by 32%.
This is due to the legal basis of regulation of the workforce.
In particular, in 2003-2004, when, as you can see from the diagram,
migration growth was minimal,
at that time, the migration legislation was tightened,
and the requirements for migrants were tightened,
the requirements for employers were also expanded,
because they had to pay the corresponding migration taxes.
But in 2007, there was a sudden surge.
In this case, we can consider this a statistical error.
Why? Because finally, in 2007-2006,
the requirements for foreign workers to be registered in the country were tightened.
And due to purely administrative measures,
those workers who had previously migrated to the country,
but they were not considered migrants,
we did not take them into account at all,
they now appeared.
Based on this, we get that there is indeed a 32% migration growth
from countries of the Middle East.
If we look at the statistics of 2007,
in January-April, the number of migrants in Russia increased by 9.5%.
Moreover, the external migration growth of the population increased by 50-40%.
This confirms the words I said earlier,
that our domestic migration is developing relatively steadily,
and not at such a rapid pace as the external migration of the population.
The number of immigrants decreased by 10.6%,
and in the countries of the Far East, the number of migrants decreased by 17.4%.
In general, these last data reflect the positive trend,
which means that for certain layers of the population,
the return to the country from abroad or the current work in the homeland
is more attractive than leaving the country with all the problems and consequences.
On the other hand, the reason for such a reduction in migration
is the counter-intensification of the legislation of different countries.
For example, the UK,
which has joined the EU, Poland and the Baltic states,
after the post-Soviet period,
has now offered a large enough migration flow
to more developed countries.
This is beneficial for the income of Western European countries.
Therefore, in order to balance the migration flow,
Western European countries are tightening their legislation.
In this regard, the number of permits for entry to Russia, the UK or Germany has decreased.
As we can see, migration growth is not only related to the wishes of the people,
but also to the reasons for their subjective position.
Migration, including labor migration,
is connected with a large number of factors of state regulation.
The national government tries to balance the labor market
and invite only those migrants who are desirable for the country's economic development.
The reasons for labor migration can be divided into two main categories.
These are economic reasons and other reasons.
Economic reasons depend on the fluctuation of demand and supply of labor.
Demand is inflated by the private and state sectors.
It usually decreases due to the cyclical unemployment and decline in the economy.
As we know, in modern Russia,
the economic growth has been increasing for several years in a row.
The GDP is about 6% of the GDP.
The cyclical unemployment is decreasing and the number of jobs is increasing.
This can be taken up by potential migrants.
On the other hand, the demographic situation is another natural reason for the fluctuation in the supply of labor.
As we know, not only Russia, or rather the main regions where these trends have appeared,
are Western Europe.
Russia is no exception here.
It is the aging of the population.
Based on the fact that the population is not actually increasing,
but the population is declining,
it certainly contributes to the government's idea of how to attract the lacking workforce to the country.
The next reason for labor migration is the uneven accumulation of investment resources.
This is due to domestic migration.
Some regions can be more developed, others less developed in terms of economy.
This is also due to the international structure of distribution of jobs
due to the different levels of development of the economy of different countries
and the different levels of development of both industry and the service sector.
The next reason for labor migration is the emergence of structural unemployment in countries.
What does this mean?
Structural unemployment, I remind you, is due to the course of economic theory,
is associated with the moral aging of a number of professions.
Accordingly, those regions that are mainly oriented to some kind of activity,
for example, mining, industry, and, accordingly, the production of cocaine, coal,
are often in a state of a semi-congealed process in a number of countries and regions.
As a result, there is an accumulation of excess workforce, which must find its application somewhere.
This is the reason for both domestic and international labor migration.
And the last, often the most important factor that contributes to the migration of the population
is the difference in the level of labor payment between countries.
Of course, this factor is associated with the inequality of the development of countries as such,
but the only thing that can be said here, or rather, what should be noted,
is that the same international trade, international investments, these processes,
lead to the fact that the level of labor payment between countries is slowly leveling out.
Based on this, of course, these processes are quite long,
but based on this concept of leveling the level of labor payment,
we can conclude that, probably, these processes can be somehow accelerated.
Based on this, within the framework of the debates that take place in the World Trade Organization,
developed countries propose to introduce certain international standards of labor payment
to the export markets, to the export markets, to the export markets,
proving that in this case, this is, let's say, a situation of low labor payment,
this is a situation, let's say, artificially created in this country,
and based on the fact that these countries receive quite high incomes,
they could increase the labor payment at the state level, due to state decisions.
Nevertheless, the difference in the level of labor payment is preserved,
and this is, again, the reason for the inter-country movement of labor resources.
Other non-economic reasons that may arise are, of course, political,
migration of the population from areas associated with military actions,
religious, ethnic, and other.
But in this case, within the framework of the course,
we are most interested in the reasons for economic migration,
which we have stopped at.
There are a number of factors that restrain labor migration.
As you know, in Russia, there has been a heated debate recently
about whether it is necessary to actively open borders
and invite the labor force to our Russian labor market.
The life standards that restrain this are, in this case,
that is, as soon as an immigrant arrives in the country of his destination,
in the country of his dream, it is assumed that he, as a citizen of the country,
must be provided with the same social guarantees as all citizens,
even during the transition period, until he has become a citizen,
at least some minimum level of these life standards.
And this is the country's cost.
Accordingly, on the one hand, the state must develop programs
to support such life standards for immigrants,
in which the country is interested.
And on the other hand, there is a contradiction here,
due to the fact that certain financial resources need to be spent on this.
Moreover, these financial resources are taken away from their, so to speak, native citizens,
and are taken away, accordingly, from those programs
that could create additional jobs for their citizens with a higher wage.
The next restraining factor is the migration restrictions
introduced by the government of one country or another.
In particular, migration taxes.
According to the legislation of many countries,
employers are obliged to pay a certain tax for an invited immigrant.
This is due to the fact that, most likely,
the salary of this immigrant will be much lower than the standards
that are already established in this country.
There is another point here.
In general, the minimum hourly wage is usually established in countries.
And from the point of view of the law, you cannot pay less.
Accordingly, those employers who are trying to officially register workers,
in this case, they will go against the legislation.
And therefore, there is a tendency of a shadow labor market,
when they try, both in post-socialist countries and in developed countries,
not to register migrants in order to have some opportunity
to pay them a salary much lower than the standards
that are associated with those specialties and with the level of payment
that exist in the far-reaching national economy.
Well, the last restraining factor is social, ethnic, religious problems.
Again, in order to maintain social standards for this population of immigrants.
On the one hand, this is important, because if you are invited to such a labor force,
which will potentially create your GDP,
to perform some activities that the indigenous population does not want to perform,
then you must provide certain social guarantees.
On the other hand, there are, of course, conflicts here,
which are associated with ethnic and religious problems.
And everyone has heard about the events that took place in France in 2006.
Although it would seem that France adopted a very favorable political program
to support migrants from Asian and African countries.
What are the forms of migration of the labor force?
The following forms are proposed.
The first form is the current resettlement.
It is usually associated with the fact that in one or another part of the Earth
or in one or another part of some separate national economy,
industrial complexes are created, integration processes take place,
and such a surge in demand of the labor force stimulates the arrival of this labor force to this territory.
The next form of migration is associated with the following reasons.
The first reason is migration within the border zone.
Of course, this form of migration is quite widespread.
And here not only, for example, European countries can serve,
but also Russia, when people go to work in neighboring countries in the border zones.
Agricultural migration is mainly associated with the climate cycle,
with the cycle of seasons, and then the arrival of agricultural workers.
This is a normal practice that is developed,
including in Western European countries,
which offer to come to agricultural workers for a certain season.
And in this regard, agricultural migration is closely intertwined with seasonal migration,
when not only agricultural work, but also construction work takes place.
We, again, in Russia, have such types of migration,
when, for example, workers from Vietnam or China come to some of our agricultural companies
for difficult work on growing, plowing, in general, cleaning vegetables.
And seasonal migration for construction work is, in general, just in sight of all,
for Moscow residents, for the residents of cities.
This is exactly the area of labor offer, it works quite actively.
And most importantly, the government of cities agrees to such migration.
And the first thing that is established in the accommodation of people invited,
as workers on the territory of a given region,
is construction work, then transport, then cleaning the territory,
various types of work that may not attract local residents.
What is the geography of migration?
Of course, the point of attraction of migrants will be developed countries,
such as the United States, Canada, Australia, all of Western Europe, the Middle East.
And developing countries, it would seem, should not be the point of attraction of migrants.
But, given that recently a whole group of countries is developing,
which is called new industrial countries,
all the same countries, which have an export-oriented economy.
These are the countries where the indigenous population gets the opportunity to get a higher salary,
to move to these, so to speak, enclaves of industrial development.
Of course, the level of income in these countries increases compared to another group of developing countries.
And then migration occurs, in particular, for example, in Latin America,
migration to more developed countries, Argentina and Mexico.
New industrial countries are another point of attraction,
South Korea, Malaysia, in this case, this is the same example,
associated with export-oriented development.
Migration sources, of course, are the whole block of developing countries,
the main one of which is Asia, the Asian region.
And the source of migration, of course, is the block of post-socialist countries,
groups of post-socialist countries,
because not in all of these countries the standard of living is high enough.
And, first of all, qualified personnel migrate,
and then these personnel, who are highly unemployed,
could not find an application for their activities.
In countries, when developing state programs,
when developing legislative acts,
first of all, a selective approach to immigrants is declared.
First of all, workers are chosen to perform hard, harmful, unqualified work,
certainly for low wages,
but which are unlikely to be agreed upon,
or to a lesser extent, their own personnel are agreed upon.
Specialists for new and promising industries,
this is the same import of brains,
highly specialized engineers, bank servants,
certainly those who migrate in this stream,
they are interested in getting a more adequate living environment,
a good place to work and high incomes.
Also representatives of rare professions,
such as diamond border guards or painting restorers,
doctors, who are practicing some special methods of treatment.
World-renowned specialists, musicians, artists, scientists,
athletes, doctors, writers.
In this case, it is impossible to say that this is a complete stream of immigrants
associated with some economic preferences.
Why? Because often specialists with a world-renowned name
are, as they call themselves, citizens of the world.
And for them, territorial migration is a natural process,
they bring their works to different territories,
in different languages, for different consumers.
The next group is large businessmen,
who invest and create new jobs.
And many countries have a program
that offers to get a kind of residence,
if you invest certain investment funds in this country,
then this program is not aimed at creating a job market,
but at stimulating investment in this region.
The next aspect that we need to consider
is a special kind of international economic relations,
such as integration.
What are the main features of integration?
In principle, the processes of interconnection,
the establishment of some economic relations,
were characteristic of different eras and stages of economic development
of countries in the market economy.
But integration is a special stage,
it has some special features.
And the first specific feature
that distinguishes integration from other processes of interaction
is the interstate regulation of national economies.
The next feature of international integration
is the formation of a regional economic complex.
Countries agree that they will have some economic zones
and, accordingly, more close cooperation relations in this territory.
Based on this, national barriers are eliminated,
not only in relation to the movement of goods and services,
but also in relation to the movement of labor and capital.
Accordingly, as a result of such a rapid integration process,
a kind of a single regional market should be created.
And such redistribution,
an adequate principle of efficiency of redistribution of all resources
on this integration territory
should provide such a synergetic effect,
the effect of growth, productivity, labor and standard of living.
What are the forms of integration?
Basically, the forms of integration are connected with the stages
of integration in one or another territory.
And depending on the emergence of new integration agreements,
these forms of integration develop
and give the opportunity to develop the regional territories,
the regional economy.
First of all, preferential trade agreements.
This is the first stage of the conclusion of foreign trade relations.
It is assumed that the tariffs are preserved here,
the entire range of national tariffs and other restrictions
in relation to the third countries.
But in relation to the countries that have entered
into this preferential trade agreement,
it is assumed that the movement of goods will be free of any barriers.
The next level of integration and the next form, respectively,
is the free trade zone.
It is assumed that all barriers in mutual trade are completely abolished here.
Customs union.
Moreover, when a free trade zone is created,
I want to draw your attention to the fact that
not only the movement of goods and services is assumed here,
but also the free movement of factors of production, capital,
the very working force, migration of the population.
Customs union.
It is assumed that the trust and relations between countries
have already reached such a level
that they not only refuse some barriers in mutual relations and mutual trade,
but at this stage they even produce a single tariff,
a single measure limiting or, so to speak,
on the contrary, allowing importation to its integrated territory.
That is, a single tariff in relation to outsiders.
The last principle is the common market.
Here, the freedom of movement of factors of production,
while assuming that all the previous stages,
which I have already mentioned,
are included as components of the concept of the common market.
Economic union.
This is the highest level of integration development.
Such an integration group is created.
The main feature of this integration group
is that not only do certain committees
on the regulation of relations be created here,
but here, so to speak, a supranational government is created.
An example of such an economic union is the European Union.
We all know that it has its own European Parliament
and, accordingly, its own European Government.
Based on this, the level of integration here is not only related to economic,
but also to political integration.
Of course, the economic union becomes more complete
when a single currency policy is carried out
and such a single currency zone is created.
What are the main two effects of integration?
The first effect is the creation of trade or the trade-based effect.
It is assumed that within the customs union,
there is a situation that there are countries
whose production costs are much lower than in the countries of outsiders
who have not joined this trade union.
Thus, the countries of the union member
are not able to supply their products to the union members.
And, accordingly, since they are no longer divided by customs barriers,
it becomes possible for such a manufacturer
to distribute resources more efficiently and rationally
and to produce goods for the entire integration union.
The second effect is the rejection of trade.
This is a negative effect of integration.
It is usually due to the fact that outside the union,
there is a manufacturer whose costs are lower
and the production is more rationally organized
and the quality of the product is higher.
But these integration tariffs begin to apply against it.
And then all the countries of the integration union
are forced to refuse to supply imports,
although it would seem that the country of outsiders
clearly has some economic advantages over its products.
And then they are forced to switch to the consumption and demand
of those goods that are on the territory of the trade union.
Therefore, this effect is called a trade distraction.
In principle, the scale of such trade can be reduced,
because, of course, by some parameters,
this product is less high-quality or more expensive,
and, in general, it does not satisfy the consumer.
What are the examples of integration unions?
In principle, there are quite a lot of them.
It would be possible to list them by regions.
In Africa, there are their own unions,
in America, there are their own unions.
In each region, on the territory of each continent,
there is some kind of integration union,
because countries understand the advantages of integration,
which we have already talked about.
This is, in general, an opportunity to increase trade,
an opportunity for some kind of integration,
cooperation solutions,
to develop, for example, the same technology transfer,
or to equip their workforce on the territory of another country,
excess workforce, and so on.
So, the most, so to speak, stable integration group,
which has achieved the highest results
among the world countries so far,
is the European Economic Community,
which in 1992 already included 15 countries of the world,
and gradually included countries of the post-Soviet space.
But now the countries of the European Union are tasked with the fact
that they no longer want to further expand the European Union
and include all those who wish to leave the European territories,
the post-Soviet space,
precisely because there are some standards of living standards,
social guarantees,
which are guaranteed to all members,
to all people who live on the territory of the European Economic Community.
And, accordingly, this requires budgetary flows,
and, in particular, redistribution of budgetary funds,
the funds of the General Budget Congress of the European Union
in favor of such more backward economies.
And since they already had experience of working with more backward economies,
take the territory of Portugal, Greece,
accordingly, these territories are in general debtors to the rest of the EU members,
they have their own problems.
Then, in general, to accumulate more problems for the EU economy
and, of course, the government of these countries does not want to include the EU members yet.
They want these countries to achieve some acceptable level of development on their own,
so that they join the EU as equal members, not as donor countries.
The next well-developed form of integration is the Association of States of Southeast Asia,
or ASEAN.
Ten countries are included.
The main distinguishing feature of this group of countries
is that this is an integration alliance based on the principles of openness.
That is, everyone who wants to enter the countries of East Asia
and recognizes the principles of ASEAN,
supports the implementation of the goals and objectives of this integration group,
they can join this integration alliance.
That is, it does not have such a rigid, closed type.
As you can see, the countries of the first and second waves of industrialization
are included in this integration alliance,
these are Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand.
Of course, there are also groups of less developed countries,
such as Vietnam and Cambodia,
but nevertheless, the trend here is that stronger countries help less developed countries to develop.
Mercosur is a common market of countries of the South-Eastern Cone,
created in 1991, Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay.
In general, the countries are quite territorially close to each other,
and, accordingly, they have traditional integration ties.
The next example is NAFTA, the North American Association of Free Trade.
In this case, the North American Association includes, in addition to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
It was organized in 1992.
This is the version of the integration alliance,
when quite developed countries are included.
Even Mexico, although it is a developing country,
its level of development is not the lowest compared to other developing countries.
Industrial integration and cooperation are developing here,
and the pace and level of international trade between these countries is quite high.
The CIS is the Association of Independent States.
It was founded in 1991,
and one of the sovereign states of the post-Soviet space was included here.
Some of them, however, have already entered as observers.
The CIS aims to restore the broken ties that were once quite closely developed within the Soviet Union,
and to restore the economic and effective ties between these countries,
because these are neighboring countries,
and these are countries that are traditionally used to supplying goods to their territories,
and are associated with historical traditions.
The Eurasian Union is the new integration alliance.
Russia pays special attention to it,
and participates in various summits of this union.
It was created on October 10, 2000.
The recipients are the Customs Unions.
It is assumed that within the Customs Union, tariffs are no longer accepted between countries.
Now there is a process of producing a single tariff for the CIS,
the issue of the currency and financial field is regulated,
and the trade procedures are simplified.
As you can see, the Eurasian countries are really included here,
and Russia is certainly interested in joining this union,
because it is assumed that these countries can simultaneously join other unions.
Moreover, the Eurasian Union will be a balancing structure,
which will take into account the mutual interests of the territorial position of these countries.
The next feature and the next group of international relations
is associated with the existence and emergence of transnational corporations,
another term is transnationalization.
In principle, a transnational international corporation is a large company
that traditionally owns capital of one country.
Of course, it can sell its shares or bonds on the open market,
and then international capital enters this national capital according to the sources of the organization.
Nevertheless, it usually has its headquarters in an apartment in some developed country,
is attached to it by economic and political bonds.
Transnational corporations exist at the current stage in both developed and developing countries.
Multinational corporations are usually different from transnational corporations
not in the business system, but in the fact that the capital that lies at its base
usually belongs to the owners of a number of countries.
And the branches of both transnational corporations are located in both developed and developing countries.
The form of transnational corporations in Russia, from the point of view of legislation,
is financial and industrial groups, such as Gazprom.
Russian transnational corporations often do not register themselves as a financial and industrial group,
which is associated with certain contradictions with the legislation that regulates the activities of financial and industrial groups.
Nevertheless, this form of development of large companies is beneficial to any state,
because it develops its branch network.
This corporation represents the interests of the state abroad, creates a positive image of the state, and so on.
Therefore, all countries in the world support their transnational corporations.
Well, if you remember that often transnational corporations, based on their huge business,
are also a major supplier of taxes to the budget of countries,
then it is even more clear why national governments support their transnational corporations
and try to lobby the interests of these transnational corporations.
The volume of transnational corporations in the world is quite large.
And the figures that you see on the slide now, they practically do not change for about 20 years.
Indeed, they control about two-thirds of the world's trade, half of industrial production.
About 10% of all employees work in industrial and household production.
60% of the work is in mother companies, 40% in subsidiaries.
They control 80% of existing patents and licenses in the world, know-how.
These are powerful structures, not only qualified by the workforce, but also advanced technologies.
They can have not only some industrial enterprises, but also scientific and research institutes.
Almost 90% of direct foreign investments also go within the framework of transnational corporations,
which, as I have said many times, are trying to overcome national trade barriers,
organizing direct assembly production or production of some components in one country or another.
Almost all raw materials trading, up to 90% of global trade, also refers to the activities of transnational corporations.
I read that the raw material of some countries is compared with the raw material of transnational corporations.
Let's not go into the problem of calculations.
From the point of view of statistics, this is an incorrect comparison, because these are different levels of indicators.
Nevertheless, we can imagine a sufficient list of these transnational corporations,
whose output is more than the output of a number of stable and developed economies.
Look at the rate of growth of the GDP.
Despite the fact that the latest data is not provided in this scheme,
it is clear that the rate of growth of the GDP is constantly increasing.
This is a natural economic process of concentration and centralization of capital and development of capital in this direction.
Transnational corporations allow to accumulate economic resources and redistribute them more rationally and effectively.
If in 1939 there were only 30 TNK, and in 1970 there were 7000,
by 2004 there were already 64000 TNK, and 830000 branches.
As we can see, within these 830000 branches, contract relations, integrated cooperation, integration relations, are supported.
And, accordingly, on the basis of these relations, it is possible to apply modern technologies,
in particular, various technologies based on the Internet,
to apply various computer programs for business management,
and track, for example, the same goods flows, production flow from raw materials to the creation of ready-made products,
and even its implementation within such a transnational corporation in an online mode.
That is, having powerful resources, such firms certainly promote technical progress
and create a positive charge for the economic development of all countries of the world.
But, on the other hand, of course, transnational corporations can probably list a whole list of negative factors,
precisely because they are monopolies.
And like any monopoly, transnational corporations, even if it is not the only one in this industry,
not the only, so to speak, oligopoly, there may be a dozen of them,
but still, transnational corporations can use some monopoly approaches in the price of education,
and then the prices for their products will be much higher than they could be in the case of a perfect competition or monopolistic competition.
And another negative factor of the TNK, as a monopoly, is that if a transnational corporation has already invested some funds in some programs,
and suddenly, God forbid, a parallel program has developed, then, in principle, it has the financial power to buy this program of activity,
the program of creating a new product and put it on hold until the time comes.
Because for it, in this case, it is not the principle of universal human efficiency that is important,
but the principle of obtaining maximum profit from existing developments,
which, of course, were funded by large funds that this transnational corporation carried out.
And we should not go far, so to speak, for example, let's say, the same Microsoft with its programs,
although against these manufacturers, so to speak, consumers constantly arise and try to initiate some processes,
divide some pieces of this grandiose company, but nevertheless, the monopoly exists here,
and the process with the negative effects of the existence of this monopoly is also developing.
If we look at some more data on transnational corporations,
then in 2005 there were already 65 thousand TNKs controlling 850 thousand branches,
and there were 74 million people employed in these branches.
In the territory of industrial developed countries, there were more than 80% of mother companies,
but, as you can see, 20% were already in the territory of developing countries,
33% were affiliated companies.
In developing countries, respectively, about 20% and about 50%.
In former socialist states, again, about half a percent of mother companies
and 17% affiliated companies are associated with it.
The next feature that is associated with transnationalization is the organization of banks.
In principle, the division into transnational banks or industrial corporations in the modern economy is quite conditional.
Why? Because the organizational structure of a transnational corporation is such that it is a diversified corporation,
headed by a holding company, which simply holds a package of shares of various types of companies, enterprises,
which are related to various types of activities.
Therefore, a bank or an industrial corporation can be included in a modern transnational bank,
and industrial structures, raw materials structures, trading structures, and so on.
Based on this, there is enough division into transnational corporations, banks and industries.
Not a single bank corporation is on the side of industrial production,
it is closely associated with some financial structures, and, accordingly, with industrial structures,
and an industrial transnational corporation simply contains specialized banks in itself.
It is very closely associated with banking structures.
Therefore, the idea that the main clients of banks are industrial and trading TNK
is simply associated with the fact that the process of creating such giants, transnational corporations of the holding type,
is certainly assumed that at some stage of development, these companies could be called primarily trading or industrial.
In general, their development, of course, goes in the direction of globalization and the creation of such production-trading financial giants.
The next feature of international economic relations is interstate regulation.
It is assumed that this is not a form of creating a certain international government,
although at other times, in publications, in journalistic articles, they even call it a world government.
So far, at the modern level of economic development and political development,
we can only say that such groups are created, which imply permanent meetings,
agreements on permanent meetings of finance ministers, trade ministers, economy, heads of state governments.
In this case, this is an option of such interstate structures,
such as the organization of summits at the level of the Big Seven,
where the seven most developed countries are included,
in particular, the United States, Japan, France, England, Canada and Italy.
And recently, due to the fact that Russia is not only a world's raw material treasure,
but also a global economy itself, it is included in this meeting process.
And now there are already summits of the Big Eight.
Within the framework of these integration interstate meetings,
the principles of a certain general financial strategy, foreign trade in development,
the attitude to various global economic and non-economic global processes,
in particular, the protection of the environment, are already being discussed.
Another form of such interstate regulation, of course, is the state bodies,
which exist within the framework of the integration group,
which I have already mentioned, for example, within the framework of the Union, the European Union,
their elected bodies and the government of the European Union.
Another direction for the development of such negotiations, international relations,
is the international organization,
whose goal is to help develop international economic relations.
And here the oldest structure is the International Monetary Fund,
which was created by the Bretton Woods Conference in 1944,
and was finally created in 1945.
It was a result of the fact that the United States of America
carried out a fairly extensive investment program to restore Europe.
As you know, the Marshall Plan,
and, of course, certain connections were developed to coordinate relations
not only between the United States and some individual countries,
but within the framework of all countries that are part of this regional impact.
Therefore, in the end, the International Monetary Fund
has become a fairly active structure that tries to influence international economic relations.
Further, the membership of the IMF assumes that, in the end,
these member states become members of the World Bank.
And if we take Russia,
it has become a member of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank since 1992.
The main goal of the International Monetary Fund, of course, is social and economic.
It is assumed that the IMF should not allow such problems as financial crises,
help in the counteraction of economic crises as a whole,
and, in general, the main goal is to balance economic relations between countries
so that the interests of one country are not hampered
and are not the cause of the development,
as a result of the spiral of the global economic, financial and structural crisis.
The next international organization is the General Trade Tariff Agreement,
which was transformed into a world trade organization in 1995.
This structure, the General Trade Tariff Agreement,
allowed countries in Europe, first of all, the United States and Japan,
to abandon the huge, almost prohibitive barriers
that were fenced by the national economy of Europe and a number of developed countries of the world.
Gradually, due to bilateral consultations and agreements between countries and members,
the need to reduce all trade restrictions was realized.
When the World Trade Organization was created in 1995,
its goals were expanded, because they already concerned the reduction of barriers
for international finance, for international transfer of technology and other economic relations.
Thus, at the current stage, the World Trade Organization already includes 150 countries of the world.
In particular, Russia is preparing for this entry,
and has held bilateral and multilateral negotiations for decades
to resolve all the issues that arise among the country's counter-agents,
which are included in international economic relations in the world.
And you understand, if there are 150 countries of the world,
it was necessary to hold negotiations with 150 countries,
to resolve all the issues and problems that existed.
The last issue related to the development of international economic relations
is another form, that is, the international transfer of technology.
This includes licensed and patent relations,
and, of course, such licensed and patent relations are primarily related to the corporate sector.
Within the framework of the state, the form of international transfer of technology
is an agreement on scientific and technical cooperation.
Again, within the framework of the corporate and, above all, the state sector,
there is an exchange of scientists, an agreement between the academy and the universities,
that is, there is preparation of such personnel and specialists,
such an international exchange, within which it is also possible to transfer technology.
Another form is franchising, which assumes that within the framework of corporate structures,
the company transfers the right to use its technologies or, let's say, the right to its trading brand.
At the same time, this is not only a right, but a demand to support the business
with such management and marketing techniques as developed in this company.
Therefore, in this regard, it can also be considered that franchising is in a certain way,
although it is not formally considered a direct transfer of technology,
but in a certain measure, franchising also supports the international transfer of technology.
Why are countries still trying to limit the transfer of technology?
First of all, this is an aspiration to maintain technological leadership.
Although any monopoly has two sides.
On the one hand, yes, this country will be a technological leader for some time.
On the other hand, this means that its technologies will get old over time,
and it will need to invest a high level of investment in these industries or in scientific and research developments to maintain its technological leadership.
That is, it will need to maintain its technological leadership.
And it is not necessary that at some stage, during some technical investigations,
this country, the technological leader, receives only one preference and dividends.
The next reason for the limitation of the transfer of technology is the idea of national security.
Of course, the state is trying to limit the distribution of military technologies.
And, first of all, technologies related to the distribution of various means of mass destruction.
On the other hand, within the framework of national security, there is a mass of double-purpose goods.
And then these technological developments, of course, the state is interested in developing its economy
and transferring from the military sector to the civil sector within its economy.
The next reason is the conditions of international agreements.
I have already mentioned the agreement between NATO member states, COCOM,
in which the transfer of military technologies and double-purpose technologies is regulated.
Of course, countries that have their own national legislation limiting the transfer of their technologies to the international sphere,
they are very clearly tracking this point.
In particular, the United States, when it tries to prove the illegality of a company in any country
and the transfer of goods, the sale of goods, some product to a third country,
proves that American technologies were involved in the development of its products.
And often the percentage of this participation can reach 10-15%.
This is a very small component, but due to this, the United States is basing the introduction of economic sanctions
or some specific prohibitions for these companies or for the whole economy,
which allowed the spread of technologies in those countries that, according to the United States, are politically unreliable.
Accordingly, there are two mechanisms for regulating the international transfer of technologies.
Of course, these are export control bodies, border customs control and indirect control
through the issuance of patents, trade marks, licenses for know-how, and the completion of engineering services.
Thus, in modern developed economies, they are trying to create an adequate mechanism for regulating the international transfer of technologies
so that all those interests and contradictions related to the international distribution of technologies
were finally allowed and did not restrain economic growth and spread of technological progress.
The next topic we will discuss is the state regulation of foreign trade relations.
First of all, let's pay attention to the objects of foreign trade regulation.
In the narrow sense of the word, these are goods of export and import flows,
and, of course, the structure of export and import, trade and payment balance issues.
However, in the broad sense of the word, foreign trade relations also concern financial relations,
since for the sale of goods by export and import, some payments must be made.
Accordingly, financial relations are also an object of our consideration.
Considering that foreign economic agents pay taxes to the state,
the budget and economic growth are also related to the development of foreign trade relations
and are an object of foreign trade regulation.
It should be noted that domestic and foreign economic policy are closely interconnected.
Take a look at the slide.
Budget and tax policy can be a factor of foreign trade regulation.
If we increase domestic taxes, domestic goods begin to cost more,
and, therefore, they become less competitive compared to those goods offered by foreign agents.
Accordingly, well-thought-out budget and tax policy can replace measures of open protectionism,
when the state introduces quotas, tariffs, and other restrictions.
On the other hand, protectionism is, in itself, the introduction of taxes.
Such tariff policy implies fiscal goals, i.e. the replenishment of the budget.
Based on this, some developing countries introduce policy of fairly tough protectionism,
precisely because they do not have other sources of replenishment of the budget, or they are very limited.
The next option is credit-money policy.
It can also replace open protectionism,
because credit-money policy regulates the money mass in the economy.
As you know, a rapidly growing money mass can cause inflation,
which, in turn, will lead to a decrease in the currency rate.
It would seem that such a terrible internal situation as inflation
and, in general, a decrease in purchasing power, for example, of the ruble,
will negatively affect consumers.
But, on the other hand, from the point of view of export, such a credit-money policy is even preferable.
Why? Because the fall in the currency rate will stimulate relative cheapening of export products,
and, accordingly, it will replace measures of open protectionism and support export.
Subjects of foreign trade regulation, from the point of view of economists, are states,
supranational institutions and various international structures.
From the point of view of law, the only subject of foreign trade relations is only the state,
because all the common international acts are, in the end, ratified by the national government.
Based on this, the law-makers, I repeat, assume that the only subject of foreign trade relations is the state.
An example of this is the process of Russia's entry into the WTO.
Before we become a member of the WTO, Russia signs agreements with almost all 150 countries on a bilateral basis
and ratifies these agreements at the national and state level.
Foreign trade policy is a special sphere of economic relations, and the problems of the export of foreign trade policy are quite complex.
The main problem is that such an economic policy should be exported, which would satisfy various groups, layers of the population.
And here the question of economic efficiency and social justice arises.
On the one hand, the market, market relations, competition contribute to the growth of economic efficiency,
and then foreign trade policy should be quite liberal.
And less efficient manufacturers, in particular national ones, can eventually leave the world market,
because they irrationally organize production, irrationally use the factor of production.
However, given the issue of social justice, such an effect on foreign trade policy would be negative for the country's development.
Therefore, the second issue, the issue of social justice, is quite important.
At least when we consider tariffs, we consider a number of aspects that push the government to include those positions in foreign trade policy
that support the social protection of the citizens of the national economy.
Thus, foreign trade policy is a compromise.
A compromise that economic agents have chosen for this period of time, a compromise between economic efficiency and social justice.
The level of this compromise depends on the level of society's development.
What are the barriers to the efficiency of state regulation?
Not everything goes smoothly, despite the fact that some legislative acts have been signed, some measures of foreign trade regulation have been developed.
First of all, this is a rent-oriented behavior of politicians.
Since foreign trade revenues are distributed unevenly, as was already said in the last lecture,
the owners of specific factors, unique factors, usually receive more income when the world's prices rise from foreign trade,
and the owners of neutral factors receive less income.
Moreover, everyone who is engaged in import-replacing industries, when prices fall due to the development of international trade,
becomes almost incompetent.
These owners lose their income.
So, the rent-oriented behavior of politicians is related to the group in which these politicians belong.
The most relevant example is the policy related to agricultural parties.
Of course, this is an import-replacing sector with its own problems,
and, of course, representatives of agricultural parties will support a tough protectionist policy,
which we have, for example, in the European Union.
On the other hand, those politicians who belong to the group of such export-based raw materials industries as the oil industry, the gas industry,
in the conditions of the modern market economy, when prices for these energy sources are constantly rising,
will be interested in the development of liberalization of foreign trade relations and the expansion of foreign trade.
And, in the end, both will lobby their decisions in state structures in order to carry out one or another type of economic policy.
A subjective reason is also a barrier to the effectiveness of state regulation.
A subjective reason is related to the development and literacy of those politicians who make state decisions.
It is assumed that if they have a legal and economic education,
they will be able to adequately deal with the problems of state regulation of the international economy.
But, on the other hand, they may have their own subjective views on how economic policy should be carried out,
and, accordingly, they may restrain the effectiveness of state regulation.
The next aspect is the apparent distortion or change in policy.
In fact, this is due to the two previous reasons.
In principle, it is possible to develop very good laws and try to implement them in real practice.
So, the officials who implement these economic laws in practice,
they can distort the goals of politics, because they have their own group and personal interests,
and they will lobby the interests of those groups to which they belong.
The next reason is the influence of the surviving economic concepts.
For example, state regulation in Russia.
If we take the beginning of the 1990s, then the main postulate of foreign economic policy was liberalization.
And within the framework of liberalization, they tried to increase export and import flows
in order to enrich the Russian economy with scarce goods and to remove the problem of food and commodity shortages.
But by 1995, the situation was such that such liberalism contradicted the interests of national producers.
And, accordingly, liberalization became a surviving economic concept.
Accordingly, during this period of time, a tougher foreign trade policy is being carried out in Russia.
But Russia, starting from the same years, is negotiating the entry into the WTO.
Accordingly, within the framework of such strategic goals, ideas and policies of liberalization must be carried out.
Thus, now productionism is a surviving economic concept for the 2000s.
As I said, the result of the production of compromise can be a kind of intermediate foreign trade policy, which takes into account various groups of interests.
The degree of development of market relations is another reason for the decrease in the effectiveness of state regulation.
As practice shows, countries with a developed legal system carry out state regulation measures more consistently.
At the same time, countries with a transitional economy, the so-called transformation economy, or a catching economy,
within the framework of a development of the legal base, the development of state policy is in more difficult circumstances.
And, accordingly, the results of such state policy can be less effective.
The next factor is the degree of openness of the economy.
Oddly enough, all countries, at least 150 members of the WTO, are in favor of a consistent liberalization of foreign trade relations.
But, as practice shows, as soon as countries become strongly involved in international economic relations,
international labor division, as soon as their export-oriented sector develops, they become dependent on the problems of cataclysms that can occur in the world economy.
Based on this, the effectiveness of state policy in these national economies will actually depend on the global economic situation.
The authoritarian actions of the state. Another problem.
And here the most typical example is the example of the state order.
That is, by distributing state orders, our representatives of the state authorities will support various industrial groups, various industrial structures.
And, accordingly, these actions of the government can have an authoritarian nature, because, again, they are carried out by certain officials,
and there is also rent-oriented behavior and apparatus distortion.
An example of such an authoritarian action of the state, for example, is the consequences of pollution of the environment.
In particular, as you know, our corporation Minatom imports industrial waste from nuclear power plants to Russia.
From the point of view of economic efficiency, this is, of course, a positive result, because investment is being made in the development of nuclear energy,
and the state has a role in the development of such policies, as payment for the import of such waste.
But on the other hand, from the point of view of social and global problems, they are only exacerbated.
The next factor in reducing the effectiveness of state regulation is mutually exclusive directions of state policy.
I have already said how the credit-money and budget-tax policy are connected with foreign trade policy.
And, accordingly, the government can take measures of the Ministry of Finance, measures related to budget regulation, the Central Bank,
and measures of credit-money policy that will completely level the steps that were taken in foreign trade policy.
In this case, the simplest example is if the Central Bank for some reason refuses to support the reduction of the ruble exchange rate in modern conditions,
the exchange rate begins to grow, and this, in turn, makes the prices of our export goods rise and makes them less competitive.
And then, in the conditions of such a non-stop, the liberal foreign trade policy will, in fact, contradict the activity of the Central Bank,
and the effectiveness of liberalization of foreign trade relations will be reduced.
There are two main trends in the development of foreign trade policy.
This is free-trading. The modern term for free-trading is liberalization of foreign trade relations.
Free-trading implies the removal of all foreign trade restrictions and the development of free competition.
Of course, the option of free-trading or liberal policy in its absolute full fulfillment is impossible.
Each country has its own national interests, and there are also those industries and groups that need to be protected in terms of social issues.
Therefore, there is no country with an ideal free-trading policy.
You once studied the option of perfect competition in economic theory.
Perfect competition, as well as absolute liberalization, are hypothetical models of development of foreign trade relations.
Protectionism is another extreme in the development of foreign trade policy.
It implies the protection of the domestic market from foreign competition.
The second half of protectionist policy is related to the development and stimulation of export industries,
and the state's activities to help export companies and to seize foreign trade markets.
The history of foreign trade policy of the 20th century is quite dynamic.
This history shows how, depending on the economic, domestic and foreign economic situation,
governments of various countries fluctuate in the development of foreign trade policy from a policy of close liberalization
to a policy that is associated with the introduction of stronger protectionist protective measures.
If we take the beginning of the 20th century, the 1930s, this is a period of great depression,
and, accordingly, the goal of foreign trade policy is to protect national producers.
Therefore, foreign trade policy of this period can be called aggressive protectionism.
It is characterized by trade wars, when one country or another introduces increasing foreign trade barriers,
and the growth of tariff rates.
After the Second World War, there is a long-term trend of liberalization of foreign trade relations.
During the Second World War, many countries came to the conclusion that it was necessary to develop mutual interests,
to develop export and import between countries, and, accordingly, the policy that would stimulate this development is liberalization policy.
The most typical example of liberalization after the war is the Marshall Plan.
Within this plan, which was developed in the United States, the United States provides economic and financial assistance to post-war European economies.
But the conditions for such financial and investment support are liberalization of foreign trade relations.
In the 1950s and 1960s, the process of liberalization continues.
And it is during this period that the first agreements are made on the development of the international system,
which has now developed into a system of the World Trade Organization.
It is then that the first documents of the General Agreement on Trade Tariffs are signed.
The 1970s are characterized by the exacerbation of the crisis situation in the world economy as a whole.
As you know, in the 1970s there was a major structural, currency, financial, and raw material crisis in most developed economies.
Accordingly, in these years, the goal of the governments of many countries is changing.
They are starting to introduce strict measures of protectionism.
A system of regional protectionism is being developed.
This concerns the development of the relations of regional protectionism within the framework of Europe and the European Union.
Starting in the 1990s, the development of the world economy is entering a certain stabilization process.
And accordingly, in this period of time, since many countries do not experience financial and economic difficulties,
issues of liberalization of foreign trade relations become relevant again.
And it is at this time that the General Agreement on Trade Tariffs finally becomes an agreement within the framework of the World Trade Organization.
The processes of such international mutual coordination of foreign trade policy are gaining strength.
And these processes have maintained their trend since 2000 and in the 21st century.
What are the characteristics of modern protectionism?
First of all, it is local.
And this local protectionism implies the allocation of various groups of countries to the world.
Developed, developing, transitional economies.
So, first of all, protectionism exists between developed countries.
In which area? In the less protected area, associated with the processes of climate complications.
This is agriculture.
So far, the shifts to liquidation or reduction of agricultural protectionism are quite insignificant.
And if we take the European Union, there are quite strict restrictions on the import of agricultural products from other non-allied countries.
The next area of regional protectionism covers the textile industry, clothing production, steel.
The second group of countries associated with international local protectionism is protectionism between developed and developing countries.
The main problem here is that developing countries with export-oriented economies develop export, production, goods and services
focused on consumption in developed countries.
Accordingly, they exert quite a strong pressure on competition in their exports, which is formed on the territory of developed countries.
And in this regard, developed countries, protecting their national producers, introduce various trade restrictions,
not only tax, but also various quantitative restrictions, quotas on the import of goods from developing countries.
And the last group of countries associated with local protectionism is developing countries.
There is a problematic relationship between them on goods of traditional export.
What are the characteristics of modern liberalization and modern protectionism?
First, within the framework of modern processes of liberalization, the sphere of tools, regulating mechanisms of foreign trade relations is expanding.
In addition to tariffs, various forms of financial support are applied, which are less predictable and less subject to international agreements.
The next feature of modern liberalization is multilateral liberalization of foreign trade exchanges.
First of all, this is a relationship between countries within the framework of the negotiation process of the World Trade Organization.
In general, modern liberalization is associated with a decrease in the overall level of all barriers.
And this, as I said, is a long-term trend of the 21st century.
Regional integration associated with the formation of integration unions is a form of modern world space that is developing rapidly.
Regional integration has features of both liberalization and protectionism.
Countries that join integration unions remove trade barriers between them.
But in relation to third countries, they develop a common system of tariff barriers and other methods of protectionist protection.
In this case, economic theory suggests taking into account two effects of the development of regional integration.
The effect of creating trade and the effect of rejecting trade.
The effect of creating trade is due to the fact that if countries that have joined the integration union for the development of international economic relations
switch and develop production in their own countries, focused on international flow,
because this production is cheaper, more efficient, and more rational.
Then, the countries that are members of the integration union develop international trade,
increase the volume of international trade within their integration group.
The second effect of rejecting trade is due to the fact that low costs and more efficient production organization
can be in those countries that, as a result of the formation of the integration union, became outsiders.
And then, tariff restrictions apply against them.
They limit their flow of effectively created products to the integration market.
And the countries that are members of the integration union start consuming goods with higher costs, goods of less efficient production.
This is a variant of economic relations, which is connected with the effect of rejecting trade.
External trade flows are reduced.
If we consider the forms of protectionism, modern theory suggests the following forms.
First of all, selective protectionism.
It is assumed that selective protectionism is a measure aimed at a certain economic activity.
It may not even be used for goods created in a certain industry, such as textiles, but only for certain groups of goods.
Such selective protectionism is usually associated with the introduction of seasonal duties, which we will discuss later.
Industrial protectionism.
A typical example of industrial protectionism is the protectionism of the EU countries in the defense of their national agricultural production.
Hidden protectionism.
Hidden protectionism implies measures of external trade regulation that are difficult to take into account.
First of all, these are financial measures.
Open protectionism.
Such a form of protectionism implies the introduction of various duties or quantitative restrictions.
Open protectionism is more subject to state regulation and international economic agreements.
Open protectionism measures are currently being reduced.
Most countries are trying to use hidden protectionism.
What are the arguments for and against protectionism?
In general, economic theory has a lot of works devoted to this argument.
There are authors who bring up to 140 positions to the list of arguments for and against.
But we will consider only some of them.
The argument against protectionism is first of all promoted by the classical neoclassical school.
In this case, there is such a concept of the second best.
What does it mean?
The idea is that there can be nothing better than liberal relations, development of international trade for countries, economic growth.
There is no second best compared to open economy.
The classics are Adam Smith, Ricardo, and the modern representatives of this direction, the monetarists.
The next position for inclusion of protectionism as a measure of state regulation is the doctrine of unused production factors.
What does it mean?
When a country in which you want to export your product is somehow protected from your trade flows with protectionism measures,
you still have an opportunity to enter this market.
Then you make investments and organize production in the territory of these countries.
Moreover, you can use labor or import labor to your territory.
Thus, the doctrine of unused production factors shows that in such a difficult situation of foreign trade restrictions,
countries still have a way out.
Moreover, this way out contributes to the general development of national economies and the global economy as a whole.
The next significant argument for the introduction of protectionism is the protection of jobs.
This is a social argument.
Let's imagine cities where there is a single enterprise and local national personnel can be employed.
Certainly, from the point of view of the development of these cities and territories,
the state will have to support the existence of these industries for some time,
even if they are less competitive in the global economic space.
The concept of economic security is another argument for protectionism.
It is due to the fact that any country assumes the worst course of events.
In the event of international political conflicts, each country should have a reserve for the development of its industries
and the ability to produce products in a closed national space.
Nevertheless, this concept has certainly been modernized in modern conditions.
It is assumed that the introduction of a system that is completely closed,
limited by international economic ties and the economy, will not be implemented.
The next argument is for the protection of the emerging national industries.
This argument is usually made by developing countries,
because for them export-oriented production is the main form of national income.
And since in these countries the industry is developing,
they become industrial abroad,
then a short-term protection of these emerging industrial industries is very important for these countries.
And is perceived by the world community as a normal form of protection from international competition.
Now let's look at the tools of state regulation of foreign trade.
There are quite a lot of them, and they can be classified according to different principles.
In general, the entire group of measures for the protection of the national economy, protectionist measures,
is divided into two large groups, tariff and non-tariff barriers.
If we take the tariff barriers, then there are two most unique forms,
these are customs duties and tariff quotas, which we will talk about later.
Non-tariff measures are quantitative restrictions.
This type of restriction is not welcomed by the international community,
because they completely block trade flows.
As I said, the hidden measures of protectionism are quite developed in modern conditions,
and developed countries are trying to resort to them,
because it is difficult to take them into account, and, accordingly, it is difficult for other countries,
counteragents to make claims to the national economy and their governments on the introduction of hidden measures.
A special block of state regulation tools is the financial measures of protectionism.
This includes subsidies, loans and various types of sanctions, including dumping.
Macroeconomic measures can be classified into a separate group,
and can be attributed to the hidden measures of protectionism.
As I said, macroeconomic policy is strongly interconnected with foreign policy,
and therefore, by means of credit-money or budget-tax policy,
you can replace some of the methods that are used in the framework of the state's tariff policy.
The last group is quantitative financial measures.
This is a special group, because it is associated with economic sanctions.
In principle, economic sanctions are not considered a common measure of state foreign policy,
because they are introduced primarily to solve some political problems.
But since economic sanctions use methods that block export and import flows,
they are also subject to economic science and the consequences of economic sanctions.
The methods of imposing sanctions are understood in economic theory and in the theory of international economic relations.
Let's move on to the first group of protectionist measures,
tariff measures and customs duties.
The difference between the terms of duties and tariffs.
As you know, a duty is a certain tax that is charged when importing or exporting goods.
But since these duties are differentiated and varied in relation to different groups of goods or countries,
they are collected in a table called a tariff.
A similar tariff can be attributed to, for example, wages,
that is, a grid of various levels of labor payment for various types of activities.
All customs duties are collected in a certain grid, which is called a tariff.
That is why customs duties are considered a tariff measure.
What are the functions of customs duties?
First of all, the fiscal function.
Why? Because it is a means of redistributing income.
If the fiscal goals are prevailing,
then such a tariff policy is not ideal.
Since the state understands that the general development of the economy and international economic relations
is a necessary component of modern economic development.
Therefore, the fiscal goal is present, but for developed countries it is a secondary goal.
But for transitional economies, which have recently experienced some financial problems,
which have a shortage of trade and payment balance, which have a budget deficit,
these countries certainly use customs duties as a means of receiving tax payments
and as a means of replenishing the budget.
The next function is protectionist.
In this case, it is assumed that customs duties help us protect certain industries from international competition
and, accordingly, help the development of certain industries.
In the end, such protectionism helps to influence the payment balance.
If the payment balance is negative and the import flows are too large and pressure the internal competition,
the state of the domestic national economy,
the implementation of protectionism measures to reduce import in a certain period of time is acceptable.
The next function is balance.
It is assumed that export and import are developed primarily out of a lack of supply and demand in the domestic market.
If we have a shortage of goods in the domestic market,
we must liberalize our foreign trade relations and expand the import flow.
If, on the contrary, there is a situation of excess of goods,
we must help export of excess goods abroad in every possible way.
A number of basic principles of tariff policy are highlighted.
First of all, this is the principle of tariff escalation.
What does it mean?
All countries, having limited resources, primarily raw materials,
are interested in importing raw materials to their territories,
because they are unrecoverable.
Based on this, the principle of tariff escalation assumes that tariff duties are low enough for some raw materials,
or are generally canceled depending on the economic situation in the domestic economy.
If we import ready-made products, the higher the degree of processing of this ready-made product, the higher the tariff barriers.
In particular, for the components that are later used in national production for the assembly of ready-made products in the domestic economy,
the tariff barriers are usually lower than for ready-made products.
The simplest example is the tariff for components for computers,
which is lower than the tariff for the import of ready-made computers from other countries.
What is the optimal tariff?
This principle is more theoretical than practical.
It was developed in the EU Institutes, when the question was discussed about what tariffs should be used,
what should be the protectionist measures system within the EU.
The optimal tariff is the tariff that does not maximize the tax collection.
The optimal tariff is not the one that allows the fiscal function of the tariff,
but the one that does not worsen the position of national consumers,
does not worsen the overall indicators of the country's economic growth.
To some extent, the idea of ​​an optimal tariff is a general theoretical idea,
but nevertheless, when developing the protectionist measures system in Western Europe, this idea was used.
What is the classification of customs duties?
We can divide them into at least three groups, first of all, in terms of collection methods.
Advalorous duties.
The name itself, Advalorous, means that this is a tax that is imposed based on the cost of the product,
that is, a certain tax on the price of the product.
Specific.
In this case, it is assumed that the tax is imposed based on the physiological characteristics of the product,
that is, on tons, square meters, liters of engine volume, and so on.
Combined duties.
In this case, these are the duties that use both the first and the second principle.
When, for example, a percentage tax is declared on the importation of a product,
it is also indicated that the total cost of the tax should not exceed, for example, 5 euros per ton.
In terms of the object of application, customs duties are divided into import, export and transit.
As you can see, in this case, the account of flows is assumed.
Of course, in the world community, customs duties are kept for the import flow.
And we have already considered arguments for such a method of import duties.
As for the export flow, developed countries are not trying to increase the price of their export goods.
Based on this, export taxes are usually not applied in developed countries.
For example, according to US legislation, there are no tariff restrictions on US exports.
On the other hand, if we take, for example, Russia,
we know that we have export duties for the export of oil and gas, that is, energy sources.
The purpose of such export duties is to redistribute the budget for the benefit of the state.
Therefore, the purpose of such export duties is redistribution of the fiscal function.
Further, our domestic consumers are also interested, especially in the summer, in the agricultural trend of energy consumption.
Accordingly, in order to somehow contain the flow of these goods for export at this time,
given that the internal prices for energy are usually contained by the lower, less profitable exporter,
the introduction of export duties allows to regulate these flows and protect the national consumer
and the deficit, or very important, product, to reorient to the domestic market.
Transit duties are usually taken for moving through the economic territory of a country some goods from one country to another.
Usually, transit duties are excluded from developed countries.
Nevertheless, for developing countries, I repeat, for them and especially for moving economies,
transit duties are a means of replenishing the budget.
Here is an example of Belarus' transit duties on the export of Russian gas to Ukraine, and so on.
Usually, of course, there are big disputes about transit duties.
In this case, these national economies replenish their budget due to transit duties.
In terms of impact, duties are divided into seasonal, compensation, and anti-dumping.
Seasonal duties are usually introduced into the goods flow depending on the demand and supply in some seasonal period.
For example, in the summer, seasonal duties can be introduced into the import of agricultural products
in order to protect the national agricultural producers.
Compensation duties, as well as anti-dumping duties, are measures of protection.
If, for example, the government or some other economic agents find out that in this case the export to the country is supported by financial support of some other measures,
then this state, against the support of other government of export, can introduce anti-dumping duties.
Of course, then a trade war begins, and it is better to move on to the coordination of their positions
and, in general, to mutually reduce these flows, and then compensation duties cannot be introduced.
Anti-dumping duties are aimed at punishing those companies that try to import at low prices in order to seize the domestic market.
What are the strong and weak sides of the method of taking tariffs?
Anti-dumping duties have one positive effect.
They maintain the same level of protection of the domestic market when prices change.
The negative side is the problem of customs valuation of the product's cost.
Of course, the importer, when offering a product that is of a certain cost to our domestic market,
tries to reduce this cost in various ways and develops a whole system of measures in modern law,
such as re-checking and re-evaluating the cost of the product.
Specific duties are quite simple to administer.
It is clear that if you take a tax for a cubic meter or a square meter, for some weight, then it is enough to simply introduce them.
But the level of protection of these specific duties greatly depends on the fluctuation of world prices.
In this case, if you import a product that has become much cheaper on the world market,
and you take a tax only from a ton or another physical unit, then you certainly do not contain this flow,
because the demand for such a product on the domestic market will begin to increase, and these products will be competitive for national manufacturers.
As for the tariff quota, what is this measure?
The tariff quota assumes that the tax is increased after the agreed volume of import is already brought to the national territory.
What does this mean?
For example, we decided to introduce 20 tons, and the tariff quota says that if you import 10 tons, then the tax is 2%.
But if you import something above 10 tons, then the tax becomes 15%.
This is the tariff quota method.
What are the advantages of the tariff quota?
In this case, it is not a complete physical restriction of export or import.
It is assumed that companies that want to seize our national market or somehow reinforce it,
will agree to pay a higher tax and, in the end, will introduce the product that they decided to offer to our national consumer.
That is, the external trade flow is not completely closed.
This is, of course, a strong side of the tariff quota.
External trade quantitative measures.
This is a fairly large block of measures, and it includes the most common quantitative restrictions,
such as quotas, licensing, import contingency, anti-dumping duties, compensation duties, and voluntary export restrictions, as well as compensation fees.
Quotas are the measure against which agreements are first and foremost within the framework of the World Trade Organization.
Why? Because quotas are a physical restriction of the flow of export and import, and more than some volume can practically be imported or exported.
Quotas are used by developed countries of the world, and this mainly applies to agricultural products, textile imports, or metals in these countries.
In particular, Russia imports metals within the framework of the quota.
Of course, these quotas are based on intergovernmental agreements, and, nevertheless, there are such physical restrictions of the flow of export and import.
Licensing is also a form of physical restriction of external trade flows, since it implies a limited issuance of licenses.
Some firms give, some do not. It is assumed that licenses can be issued for a limited volume of export and import operations.
Nevertheless, licenses can be general, and then there is no physical restriction of licensed goods.
Licenses are usually issued for the export of gold, diamonds, and other rare valuable goods, to either limit its export, or, on the contrary, limit its import,
since the situation of demand and supply in the domestic market of the countries' economies is changing.
Import contingency. Such a complex name is associated with seasonal quotas.
That is, a certain contingent of goods, a certain list of goods is subject to a physical restriction of import or export.
I have already mentioned anti-dumping and compensation duties.
They are associated with the fact that when countries are not interested in importing some goods at too cheap prices,
or cheap prices are associated with the fact that this export is supported by various financial methods by the governments of other states,
then these anti-dumping and compensation duties are considered fair and are introduced on the basis of judicial proceedings.
Because, in principle, it is impossible to introduce an anti-dumping and compensation duty without a fairly complete consideration of the problem.
That is, it is necessary to take into account the position of the parties, why this price was so low, or why a particular tax was introduced.
Voluntary export restrictions. Voluntary in quotation marks. Why?
Because it is assumed that the country introducing voluntary export restrictions, as a result of negotiations with its counterpart, with another country,
understands that if it does not voluntarily limit its export, then various restrictive measures will be introduced against it,
in the form of quotas, licenses, or even compensation duties.
Voluntary export restrictions are usually introduced when the country of the importer has a negative trade balance with this country,
that is, there is a fairly strong import flow.
Such voluntary export restrictions exist in Russia, with many Western European countries, for the export of metals,
in Japan, the United States, for the export of Japanese food to the United States.
In the same row of quantitative restrictions are the compensation duties,
since they are higher than any other measures that stimulate export, which were introduced by importers earlier,
and that is why their price, their goods are cheaper.
There are various ways to distribute licenses. First of all, it is an auction-based competition.
The second option is a system of explicit preferences, and the third option is competition on an initial basis.
An auction-based competition is the most preferable option, because in this case those who are trying to get a license for export or import,
they compete in terms of the purchase of licenses, and, accordingly, the state wins from the sale of such a license agreement.
If we have an explicit preferences system, it is usually used by the government in the case
if these are already permanent counteragents and the companies have recommended themselves on the good side,
and, accordingly, there is no competition here, and the invitation or distribution of licenses is carried out directly by officials.
Competition on a non-price basis is also a significant form of distribution of licenses,
since it is assumed that the main parameter of victory in this competition is some non-price characteristics of the product.
Now let's look at the types of export support. First of all, this is direct export stimulation.
It is assumed that the state distributes part of the budget, for example, to agricultural producers,
and, moreover, in the EU, some taxes on imports after their collection by targeted programs are redistributed to agricultural products.
Export subsidies for agricultural products are difficult to track,
since the motivation of these subsidies is related to the fact that the domestic national economy is supported,
and, accordingly, the domestic industry, for example, agriculture or some industry of machinery.
Direct export stimulation is primarily associated with various financial types of support,
such as the benefit lending of exports. Benefits are provided both in terms of terms and interest rates, and by sources of funds.
Financial assistance to developing countries is a form that is used by quite actively developed countries.
It is assumed that the financial assistance provided to these countries will be spent on the purchase of goods that will be exported from these developed countries.
Again, the motivation of such financial assistance is associated with social issues, and it is quite difficult to prove the benefits of exporters.
The next form is state insurance. It is also developed to a lesser extent in developed countries,
when the state, in a legislative order, insures and guarantees export firms from various risks in the territories of various countries.
These can be insurance of loans, various political risks, and not only risks related to weather conditions, which will most likely be insured by private firms.
Tax benefits on domestic taxes. In this case, this is a fairly hidden form of export support,
since domestic tax benefits can be distributed to a large number of types of goods.
Again, it is quite difficult to prove that these tax benefits were aimed at the support of exporters, and not at the development of national economic industries.
State information assistance. In this case, it is assumed that the state can subsidize or finance the organization of exhibitions, international salons.
Of course, firms that provide their goods and protect the country's honor at these exhibitions receive additional information about possible competitors and innovations introduced by foreign firms.
The international export control system was mainly developed during the Cold War.
The example I am giving you is the existence of the Co-Competition Committee for the Control of Export.
This committee existed within the framework of NATO countries, and within this committee programs were developed for the control of arms,
for the control of the production of nuclear energy, and also for the control of the production of industrial goods.
It should be said that in modern conditions, each country has developed laws and legislative acts that allow such international control, both within and outside the framework of the Co-Competition Committee.
In particular, it is possible that in the conditions of integration and cooperation between countries, although measures may be aimed at one particular country for political purposes, third, independent countries may suffer.
In this case, the example I would like to consider is the production of a military aircraft in Russia. Suppliers of components and systems for this aircraft are a number of Western European countries.
Nevertheless, within the framework of monitoring the transfer of military technologies to the United States, a number of Western European companies were prohibited from exporting components for the production of such an aircraft.
Sanctions imposed by the US government on Sukhoi in connection with the issue of arms supply to Iran were lifted in the fall of 2006.
Nevertheless, the countries and suppliers of components for the production of this aircraft, the DeskJet, were under pressure and influence.
What are the modern features of export control? First of all, in modern conditions, there is a transition from export control to export control of strategically important technologies.
Moreover, the main orientation of such control is switched to competitive and preventive measures within the framework of international negotiations and international agreements.
The struggle against industrial espionage is intensified. Moreover, there is a differentiation of countries in terms of access to high-tech. And, of course, getting into such a blacklist is not a good option for those countries of the transition economy that are developing their exports and imports.
First of all, export control is taking place in relation to new goods and high-tech. As soon as these technologies and goods become more widespread in international trade, control is lifted.
Now, the question of economic sanctions. I have already said that economic sanctions are a form of continuing political relations. The extreme case of modern political relations is military actions.
Before military actions, under the framework of such an economic threat, some countries introduce economic sanctions. These sanctions have the greatest effect and effectiveness if they are introduced by the entire international community within the framework of the UN agreement, and not by individual countries.
Nevertheless, many countries resort to economic sanctions as a preventive measure to solve political problems. In this case, the United States and the United States are the leaders in introducing sanctions. But Russia has also been often resorting to economic sanctions in recent years.
If we classify economic sanctions, they can be divided into trade embargoes, point sanctions, and financial sanctions. In principle, the introduction of a trade embargo implies that export and import flows to this country are blocked, except for humanitarian flows in the framework of humanitarian aid, medicines, food products.
Such a trade embargo has negative social and economic consequences, because the class or political leaders who were directed to implement these sanctions are not suffering. The third party suffering from the introduction of a trade embargo is the ordinary population of the country.
Often, the introduction of a trade embargo has a negative effect. For example, the ban on the export and import of diamonds from the regions of South Africa, which were organized and directed against those militant groups that were developing military relations there at that time.
The consequences of these sanctions had a negative effect in that as soon as the legal flows of export and import of diamonds were blocked, illegal trade developed, and prices for these diamonds increased.
Thus, the profits from the global price growth were received by those groups against whom economic sanctions were directed in the form of a trade embargo. In modern conditions, point sanctions are preferred. Why?
First, they are aimed at a separate group of goods. A more developed form of point sanctions is the direction of these restrictions on the activities of individual lists, on their movement between countries, entry and exit.
Now a few words about the tariff policy of Russia. In principle, the processes of liberalization and protectionism are characteristic of the tariff policy of Russia over the past 15-17 years.
It depends on the economic state of Russia, and on this, the policy of Russia changes either in favor of more liberalization or in favor of more rigid protectionism.
In 1993, the first wave of the tariff policy of the Russian Federation was the introduction of the Customs Code, which was corrected in 2002. This correction was related to the liberalization of relations and various types of restrictions.
This is because Russia, since 1995, has been actively preparing for the entry into the Customs Union. Multilateral, bilateral negotiations were held with virtually all member states of the Customs Union, and bilateral agreements were signed.
In general, according to the system of protectionist measures, the advalorous rates of tariffs at the level of 5% or less cover about 40% of the entire nomenclature of the goods of Russian imports, and more than 44% of the volume of imports from far-away countries.
In general, when one or another country finally enters the system of the World Trade Organization, the average tariff is calculated. Therefore, the tariff for some goods groups can be 0% on imports, and this is usually the raw materials groups, and for some, a fairly high tariff, for example, 15%.
On average, this means that the average level of protectionist protection will be 7%. Accordingly, countries take into account the entire package of agreements and all types of goods and the entire tariff grid, and such an averaged level of protectionist protection is calculated.
The trend of modern tariff policy in Russia is due to the fact that documents and legislative acts have been developed for a long time, which would not contradict the norms of the World Trade Organization.
In particular, the principle of the WTO as the most favorable regime, which means that the tariff and other restrictions between the two countries that signed such a regime of the most favorable regime, these tariff restrictions are no worse than in relation to third countries.
Thus, within the framework of these agreements, Russia signs agreements with 150 WTO member countries, which reduces the level of protectionist protection.
What are the factors of weakening of the functions of Russian tariffs? In this case, this is due to the fact that the Russian market economy is still quite young. In fact, gray schemes of importing foreign goods are still spreading.
As for industrial goods, long-term use goods, mainly technological goods that are imported from the Asian region. The next factor is the resorting.
In this case, when determining the cost of the imported goods, it is possible to manipulate this cost and, accordingly, the goal of many companies is to reduce the import cost of the goods.
The main problems here are related to the development of a system of measures that would allow to neutralize some subjective points, that is, when the personal interests of the customs officers will exceed the interests of the state.
On the other hand, in Russia, as in the rest of the world, there are schemes for optimizing tax and customs payments, which again reduces the real level of tariff protection.
The last component is the stock market import. The trend of stock market import is declining. Although, if we take the Russian economy of the early 90s, then most of the supply of long-term use goods, clothes from the near and far abroad was done by the stock market method on the Russian small-cap market.
In modern conditions, stock market import is slowly transforming into a more established type of activity, into the activity of small and medium-sized companies, which are largely subject to state regulation.
In this regard, it can be considered that the stock market import, as a factor that weakens the functions of the Russian tariff system, will slowly decline as the market relations in Russia develop.
The next topic that we will discuss in our course is the international currency-financial system and currency regulation.
The international currency-financial system is a form of organization of currency-financial relations, functioning independently and serving the international movement of goods and production factors.
The development of the country's currency-financial system is influenced by a number of factors. First of all, it is the development of the country's economy.
If the country has stable economic growth, if there is low inflation, low unemployment, then the attitude to the currency of the country is positive, and usually it is strong, stable and preferred by all economic agents.
On the other hand, if we export goods and are the leaders in the export of goods to various industries, then the international demand for our currency for payment of export operations will be present in the world community.
This is supported by our currency. The national and global political situation is also a factor in the influence of the country's currency-financial relations.
The extreme variant of unstable political situation is wars. During the war, the currencies of the warring countries and parties usually weaken, there is a high level of inflation, and the currency is devalued.
Economic sanctions and embargoes, which we talked about in the topic of state regulation of foreign trade relations, will certainly have a negative effect on the state of our currency.
If some countries have introduced economic restrictions against our country in the form of sanctions and embargoes, it means that trade is beginning to be restrained, the supply of foreign currency to our country is reduced, export and import are reduced, and the situation is developing in the country when the trade deficit and payment balance are possible, which will certainly affect the level of our currency exchange rate.
The power ratio between countries is another factor affecting the country's currency relations.
Any developed or developing economy is subject to cyclical fluctuations. There are periods of decline of national economies when the pace of economic growth is reduced, or economic growth in general goes into negative indicators.
Countries with strong developed market economies are more likely to suffer from this situation. Even though their currency becomes weaker, less protected, under pressure of internal economic relations, nevertheless, developed market economies have more opportunities than developing countries, than transition economies, to maintain their national currency.
The goals of the currency-financial system are, first of all, to ensure the exchange rate of the same flow of export and import.
The next goal is to ensure the stability of the currency mechanism, to ensure the stability of the financial flows. As we remember, financial flows can have an independent meaning, especially at the current stage of the development of the world economy.
In this case, I mean financial flows in the form of direct and portfolio investments, financial flows in the form of loans and loans.
Another goal of the currency-financial system is to ensure flexibility in relation to the changing economic situation of the country.
What are the components of the currency-financial system? First of all, these are the currency elements of the system.
They include the national currency, the conditions for mutual currency convertibility and the conditions for maintaining this convertibility, the currency parity, in this case, the ratio between the currencies and the basis on which this currency parity is calculated, the currency exchange rate and the national and international mechanisms of its regulation.
Usually, the currency deviates from the currency parity, and based on this, the question of what is the basis of the country's currency exchange rate is an interesting problem, which we will talk about a little later.
The financial elements of the system are international financial markets. When we talk about the financial market, it is assumed that this is not only a currency market, but also a fund market, that is, a market of securities and a credit market.
Accordingly, the financial elements of the system in the form of financial markets can be represented in the interbank market, where the banks are agents and counteragents of this system.
The second component of the financial elements of the system is the mechanisms of trading specific financial instruments, namely, currencies, securities, loans.
Financial agents, namely, the currency, fund, and credit markets are represented in the present conditions by individuals, corporations, and the central bank.
We are quite accustomed to these financial agents, but the new financial agents, such as municipalities and public organizations, have been developing their active activities in the last 20 years.
Let's look at the scheme of the international financial market organization. First of all, the exchange between the counteragents of the international financial market is made by banks, bank credit organizations, insurance companies and pension funds.
As I said, insurance companies and pension funds are the new intermediaries that have appeared and have been active for the last 20 years on the international financial market.
In principle, the relationship between creditors and sellers on the financial credit market can be represented by banks, bank credit organizations, insurance companies, pension funds.
On the other hand, these relations can be built directly, that is, creditors and borrowers can do without intermediaries. It is assumed that the same scheme is suitable for the characteristics of not only the financial, but also the currency market.
In the broad sense of the word, the currency is any commodity that is able to perform the function of money.
As you know, economic theory proposes a number of functions of money. These are the measure of value, means of circulation, means of payment, means of accumulation, and world money.
In modern terms, almost no currency performs the function of world money, that is, such funds that would be recognized for the exchange, for payments by all states.
But nevertheless, we can say that in the modern currency system, the rest of the functions of national currencies are being performed.
And the currency in the international exchange, in the international arena, should provide international commodity flows, as well as work on the international credit and fund market.
The currency can be classified by its affiliation. If you ask a citizen what a currency is, he will say a dollar or a euro. In this case, this term applies to a foreign currency.
Therefore, it is a payment method of other countries that is legally or illegally used in the territory of the domestic country. At the same time, the national currency must be allocated, that is, the legal payment method on the territory of the issuing country that provides the exchange of goods.
And now we will talk about the possibility of currency regulation of the national currency.
In principle, the following characteristics of the reserve currency, freely convertible, and the hard currency can be identified. All these characteristics apply to various national currencies of the countries of the world.
Of course, a separate national currency may not have these characteristics. But any national currency, and accordingly, those currency bodies that try to regulate the currency relations, try to develop their system to such an extent that the national currency becomes both a reserve, a freely convertible, and a hard one.
Let's look more closely at the definition. So, the reserve currency is a foreign currency that the national economy accumulates to maintain its currency reserves.
And accordingly, if the country is in a situation of a deficit of payments, in particular, on the foreign trade balance, then in this case, the central bank can cover the negative balance of the payment balance from the currency reserves.
Of course, the reserve currency is a currency that should have the following properties in our list, namely, it should be freely convertible and hard. So what is a freely convertible currency?
It is a currency that is widely used to make international payments, is actively sold and bought, and is recognized by all players of the international currency market.
This definition is, of course, the most general for the concept of a freely convertible currency. We will further analyze the criteria for convertibility.
A hard currency. In this case, a hard currency is the basis of a reserve currency, and, in general, a hard currency is accumulated in reserve funds.
This currency is characterized by a stable currency exchange rate, it is less subject to financial risks, and in this case it is assumed that a hard currency is organized and formed only in those countries where internal economic stability is the main feature of economic development.
So, a hard currency is formed when the internal economy is stable, when foreign trade flows are stable, and the trend of economic development has positive results in all macroeconomic indicators.
Now let's analyze the convertibility of the currency in more detail. What is convertibility? It is the ability of residents and non-residents to freely exchange national currency for foreign and use foreign currency in trade and financial transactions.
As you can see, it is assumed that we are talking about converting our own national currency, and it is its ability to exchange foreign currency that is understood in the concept of convertibility.
In this case, the definition of a resident and a non-resident is in force. The most accurate definition of a resident is given by economic statistics. If these are individuals, then these are citizens of a country that has been in their territory for more than six months.
Residents are legal entities since the registration of a legal entity. Therefore, as soon as a company is registered in the territory of this country, it is a resident.
In this case, it is assumed that residents and non-residents freely exchange national currency and use it in their trade and financial transactions.
In order to understand the principles of currency convertibility according to such two significant characteristics as the convertibility of the currency on current accounts and the convertibility of the currency on the account of capital, we need to look at the payment balance scheme.
Let's look at the payment balance scheme. The payment balance consists of two large accounts. The first article in the current operations account calculates export and import. The difference between export and import is determined as the trade balance of the country.
Naturally, if the export in the country is greater than the import, then the trade balance is positive. The second article of the payment balance is the income obtained from abroad and the income paid abroad.
The income is obtained from the factors of production. The transfer of wages, interest, and profits associated with foreign economic activity is included in the current operations account.
The last component of the current operations account is the current private transfers obtained from abroad or paid abroad. In this case, such transfers are assumed to be various donations, assistance, which is provided by private organizations, not the state.
If we now sum up the indicators of the left and right columns presented in our scheme and find the difference between them, then the balance of the current operations accounts allows us to take into account mainly foreign trade flows and the flows of income of the owners of the factors of production, which are organized in international economic relations.
The capital account or the capital operations account, first of all, the first component of the capital account is foreign investment and domestic investment, which we transfer abroad.
As is well known, investments can be both portfolio and direct, but nevertheless, in this case, it does not matter, they can be divided into accounts, but we have all these investment financial flows in the first line of the capital account.
The second line is the inflow of state foreign transfers. Here is the state aid, the inflow and outflow of foreign aid provided by state institutions, reflected in the capital account as an indicator of state foreign transfers.
Accordingly, in addition to donations or such free financial assistance as transfers, another component of the financial flows between countries is loans.
The next line of the capital account is the inflow of loans to the country and the outflow of loans from the country. The balance of the capital account balances the left and right columns of the account.
It is assumed that there is a certain interdependence between the balance of the trade balance and the balance of the capital account. The total balance is calculated as the amount on the balance of the trade balance and as the balance of the capital account.
Please note that in this case, both the trade balance, the balance of the current operations, and the balance of the capital are quite interconnected.
If international trade develops in the country, there is a fairly rapid flow of exports, then usually a positive trade balance and a positive balance of the current operations are formed.
Then the state in the country, economic agents accumulate excess capital assets. And then such a country usually gives a loan, carries out foreign transfers abroad, carries out international investments.
Thus, it turns out that the balance of the capital is the balancing factor of the balance of the current operations. And if we have a positive balance of the current operations, then there is an inflow to the country on payments, on trade transactions, then usually the capital account is outflow of foreign investments.
Thus, the capital account will have a negative value. Plus and minus in the general arithmetic addition, in this case, give zero. That is, if the balance of payments is balanced, then it is zero.
If the situation is such that foreign trade is less developed, import is large enough, and exporters are not so competitive on the international market, then the balance of the current operations becomes negative.
In order to cover these external economic payments, the state and the companies have to make loans. And then the capital account balances the negative account of the current operations.
And according to the indicators of the capital account, the inflow of capital assets to the country becomes positive. Thus, the first and second halves of the balance of payments are mutually balanced articles.
If the situation is such that it is impossible to cover the country's shortcomings of the current operations due to loans and other investment inflows, then reserve funds are used.
Then the reserve fund performs the function of a source from which the central bank covers its external debts.
Based on this, we can find out the convertibility of the current operations, that is, the absence of restrictions on payments and transfers.
Accordingly, it can be hard and soft. If we have a fixed currency exchange rate, then the convertibility of the current operations is hard. If we have a floating currency exchange rate or a rate with regulated floating, then the convertibility of the current operations is soft.
First of all, when entering the International Monetary Fund, countries must introduce convertibility of the current operations for their currencies to support the development of international trade relations.
There are many factors that affect the convertibility of the current currency. But, as I said in the previous lectures, internal and external economic development certainly affects the convertibility of the current currency.
If we have a liberal trade system, and, accordingly, the economic barriers that restrain export and import are low enough, then the rapid development of export and import leads to the stabilization of the national economy and economic growth, and, accordingly, to a positive trade and payment balance.
Foreign currency inflow occurs. At the same time, there is a rise in demand for domestic currency, since we export our goods, and they can be paid from the exchange rate of foreign currency for domestic currency.
And most importantly, there is an internal demand for the economy, and this demand turns into a demand for domestic national currency. Then the exchange rate becomes stable and, of course, its convertibility increases.
Convertibility of capital operations. There is a lack of restrictions on payments and transfers on the account of capital, which we have previously considered. This implies that the currency is convertible for such operations as direct portfolio investments, loans, capital grants.
The demand for the International Monetary Fund is not distributed for convertibility of capital operations. Moreover, depending on the financial and economic situation on the domestic market, one or another developed country introduces restrictions on convertibility of capital operations.
And even though the US dollar is a solid, convertible, stable currency, at a certain time the US government introduced restrictions on convertibility of capital operations. This was in the 1970s, when the world financial crisis was taking place.
What are the most typical capital limitations? First of all, this is a limitation of direct foreign investment in a separate sector. The state prohibits foreign economic agents to invest or buy shares of strategic enterprises.
Then there is a ban on opening accounts of foreign currency in foreign banks. The next limitation is the requirement of a return on profit by national companies investing abroad. This requirement usually arises when the national currency exchange rate of the country is experiencing difficulties.
The demand to issue or sell foreign currency obtained abroad was introduced by the Central Bank for a long time. In the current conditions, when the positive balance of trade and payment is the main positive feature of the Russian economy, this demand is certainly removed.
The next limitation is the ban on buying foreign securities by residents of the country. This is a limitation on the current stage of Russia's development.
The next limitation is the introduction of foreign loans. In general, the form of capital limitation is quite diverse. Depending on how quickly the country moves towards full convertibility of its currency, it removes certain restrictions.
The general principle is that if the convertibility of the capital is limited, then there is no outflow of capital. Naturally, such a form of limitation will be used primarily by the transition economy or developing countries or countries that experience problems in the national cyclical development of the economy.
Full convertibility assumes that there are no restrictions, no control, both on the account of the current and on the account of capital operations.
Russia is experiencing a difficult path to convertibility of the ruble. In the programs of Russia's development for the next three years, the Central Bank is tasked with bringing Russia to full convertibility of the ruble.
For this purpose, the currency liberalization is carried out step by step. That is, certain restrictions are removed.
In particular, one of the options that prompts the recognition of the weightiness of the convertibility of the ruble is the law introduced by the Central Bank on January 1, 2007, according to which our domestic exporters pay taxes to the budget in the domestic currency.
This stimulates the exchange of dollars and euros for the Russian ruble and the demand for the domestic currency increases. Its stability is established.
What are the conditions for the transition to full convertibility of the national currency? Let's summarize.
This is a difficult issue for the government, because the convertibility of the currency primarily implies the stabilization of the country's economic development.
Internal macroeconomic stability is minimal inflation, almost minimal unemployment, stable economic growth within 2-5%.
This is a stable state budget. It is assumed that the state budget has not deficits, but profits.
The central bank monitors and adopts various levers of the credit-money policy to stabilize the currency.
In general, all these conditions for the transition to full convertibility of the national currency are already being implemented in the development of the national economy of Russia.
In particular, in March 2007, the accumulated foreign capital in the Russian economy amounted to $151.5 billion, which is 33% more than in the corresponding period of the previous year.
This means that the trust in the Russian economy is growing, foreign investors agree to take risks, hope for a reduction in the risk of the national economy, and there are flows of capital to the account of capital.
The dynamics of export and import of the Russian Federation, as seen from the schemes presented on the slide, also make us proud of the export-import relations of the Russian economy.
The balance of foreign trade, the difference between export and import, which is marked by the column diagram, is constantly positive, which makes it possible for foreign currencies to flow into the territory of Russia.
This gives the opportunity to gradually move to full convertibility of the Russian ruble, not only in export-import operations, but also in capital flows.
Another feature of convertibility is internal and external convertibility. Traditionally, the first step in the process of stabilizing the national currency is the development of measures for internal convertibility.
This is the right of residents to buy, own and operate within the country with foreign currency assets. Otherwise, it is assumed that if internal convertibility is introduced, then our buyers can exchange dollars for euros, rubles for euros or dollars, and pay their transactions, buy goods for foreign currency, that is, for dollars or euros.
Moreover, internal convertibility assumes that domestic economic agents can open foreign currency accounts.
There is one significant problem here. The Russian ruble is an internal convertible. And during the crisis period of the Russian economy, our prices were set in dollars or in so-called conditional units.
The American dollar was used as a measure of cost. Often, many stores used dollars instead of rubles. It was used as a payment method. Moreover, most citizens accumulated their savings not in rubles, but in dollars.
As you can see, this is the internal convertibility that occurs when the economy is unstable. It is assumed that internal convertibility is the freedom of citizens to accumulate their savings in one or another currency.
As soon as the Russian ruble became more stable in its development, a reverse trend occurred. According to the modern assessment of the Central Bank of Russia, there is a shift in the preferences of Russian investors.
Current accounts are opened in rubles, while the savings in dollars or euros grow at a slower pace.
In modern conditions, the main feature of the internal convertibility of the Russian ruble is the right of Russian citizens to open foreign currency accounts in euros, dollars, and in various national banks.
External convertibility is the right of residents to make transactions with foreign currencies, with non-residents. Here, the ruble currency gradually begins to gain external economic space.
In particular, this external convertibility is carried out with the nearest foreign country, such as Ukraine, Belarus, and other CIS countries. The main task is to make the Russian ruble an internationally recognized currency, not only stable, but also a reserve currency.
I will return to this issue a little later. Residents can use foreign currency. The issue of internal convertibility is related to the issue of dollarization, or, if you want, euroization of the national currency market,
and the possibility of a situation when a parallel transaction or currency substitution occurs. There are regimes of national currency systems of developing countries, when a parallel transaction of several currencies is allowed by law.
For example, a national currency, let's say a dollar, or a national currency, let's say a hryvnia, or a ruble. Such a parallel, officially recognized transaction is a normal situation. It is assumed that the country's currency and finance agencies have the ability to control this situation.
If dollarization or substitution of foreign currency by the function of the national currency, namely, not only the function of the accumulation of funds, but also the function of the exchange of payments, the measure of value, is a very bad indicator of the development of the national currency system.
In particular, the reason why the EU decided to introduce a single currency system supported by all EU countries at a certain stage of its development is dollarization.
The large number of dollars in Europe, euro-dollars, and in this case such an accumulation of dollars was not a positive trend in the development of the European currency-finance system, since such an accumulation implies a parallel transaction or currency substitution in the least developed countries of the EU.
At present, the introduction of the euro, its stabilization, leads to the fact that dollars for residents have ceased to be a means of accumulation, and Europeans prefer their own euro to create some kind of stock accumulation.
This is also happening in Russia, where the dollar is being extracted from the reserves of citizens, and moreover, payments in stores are carried out in the national currency.
It should be emphasized that the ban on payments in the foreign currency is based on state interference, it is simply forbidden to make payments in the foreign currency, and it is allowed only in its national currency.
This was a measure that would counteract the currency substitution. But in modern conditions, such a measure, even if the law was abolished, on the requirement to pay only in the national currency, would hardly receive a large distribution of substitutions.
Russian citizens are already used to the prices in Russian rubles and to payments in Russian rubles, as I said, even in the accumulation of national rubles.
In principle, the currency system can be divided into three large groups, namely, the world, regional and national.
As you understand, the regional currency system is represented by the euro zone. The world currency system has its own features and features, related to the introduction of international currency regulation and the actions of various international currency organizations.
We have already talked about the national currency system. So, what are the main differences between the national and world currency systems?
The basis of the national currency system is the national currency, and the basis of the world currency system is the reserve currency. In this case, when such a powerful international currency organization as the International Monetary Fund was organized, it introduced a substitute for such a world currency, namely, special borrowing rights.
These securities are absolutely liquid, absolutely mutually convertible, and practically for final mutual calculations, countries included in the International Monetary Fund can be counted not only as a foreign, solid, stable, convertible currency,
but also as part of special borrowing rights. But this is an extreme option, since each country is a member of the IMF, it is valued by its own SDRs, and because they are the basis of its international currency reserves.
Another element of the currency system is the condition for the conversion of the national currency, and for the international currency system, the condition for the mutual conversion of currencies based on the same special borrowing rights or SDRs.
The next component of the system is the parity of the national currency, and for the SDR, a unified regime of currency parities was developed, which is based on mutually binding currency rates.
The main element is also the national currency rate regime, and in this case, the world currency system is supposed to develop some rules for the regulation of the regime of national currency rates for their more correct determination.
Without listing the remaining elements of the currency system, which you can see in this table, we should note that the main criterion of the national currency system is that the national currency, the national currency system is regulated by the national bodies.
Unlike this system, the world currency system assumes that international currency organizations, such as the International Bank of Reconstruction and Development, the IMF, which was created to regulate the currency relations between countries, are trying to regulate the currency-financial relations between countries, members of the IMF.
The next component of the currency system is the currency parity. What is it? It is the ratio of the value of two currencies expressed through a third of the funds.
This is a basis that allows the Central Bank to determine the middle component around which the currency rate will eventually fluctuate.
What is the basis on which the currency parity is calculated? It is the world reserve funds. In ancient times, such reserve funds were gold and silver.
Today, gold has retained its reserve function. Despite the fact that gold has ceased to be a means of exchange or payment, there are no gold coins, nevertheless, all the central banks of the world keep gold in their gold reserves as a value that can be a means of final calculations between countries with a negative trade balance
and a fall in the national and foreign exchange rates, that is, in the financial crisis. If we recall the situation in the 1970s, when the financial crisis occurred, the Bretton Woods system collapsed.
The system in which the US dollar was calculated according to the currency parity with gold, that is, it had a gold content, and all the leading countries in the world equated their currencies with the dollar, and calculated the value of their currency in relation to it.
At this time, when in the 1970s Europe was over-saturated with euro-dollars, the central banks of the future EU practically bought dollars in order to then exchange them for gold in the central bank of the US.
And during this period of time, the US spent 50% of its gold reserve to restore the financial system. In order for this situation not to repeat in the world, the International Monetary Fund created special loans, that is, a system in which the leading countries of the world, members of the International Monetary Fund, invested hard currencies in the International Monetary Fund,
in particular Russia, when the International Monetary Fund entered the market, as a reserve, offered gold, since at that time it did not have the converted currencies to provide such reserves.
What is SDR? Special loan rights. In fact, they are sometimes called paper money, that is, these are some kind of securities, these are virtual securities, this is a record on the accounts of the International Monetary Fund and a correctional record on the accounts of the central banks of the countries.
But it is considered the most convertible currency, and in case of any problem, countries can pay with these special loan rights. But, of course, they are not refused, but are kept and probably the last moment they are used.
What else is included in the world reserve funds? This is a foreign currency. Another name is a motto. I will return to this issue later. Now the second point is what else could be included in the parity calculation.
There is also an option of such a parity calculation of the currency exchange rate, when the exchange rates are compared by the purchasing power, by the purchasing power of the ability to buy goods in one country and in another country for their currency and for a foreign currency.
So, the parity of purchasing power implies such a calculation exchange rate, which is really called a real exchange rate, because it takes into account the level of inflation in foreign countries and in the domestic country. Thus, the most clearly, unlike the market exchange rate, which is influenced by demand and supply, shows the real purchasing power of the country.
In particular, according to the parity of purchasing power, the exchange rate of Russia should be not about 25 rubles per dollar, but only 15. That is, the purchasing power is strong enough due to the fact that we have a high export, although recently there has been a high import.
The parity of purchasing power is calculated by different methods, as I said, through comparable baskets of goods. It is clear that these should not be goods of some local consumption, which are not connected with international preferences. This is just the product group that is used in any country.
The simplest example is the setting of a parity for some one product that is widespread all over the world. In this regard, McDonald's can be proud that one of the options for calculating the parity of purchasing power, though the most approximate, is the ratio of prices of hamburgers in different countries.
Depending on the ratio of prices, you can calculate the most correct, more adequate currency exchange rate or real exchange rate. In statistics, the Central Bank, of course, calculates the parity of purchasing power of the currency by more complex methods, as I said, through the price index.
Thus, it takes into account the necessary changes in inflation in its country and abroad.
The most ancient standard was the metal standard, that is, the gold, silver and so on. In principle, the gold standard was introduced twice in the 20th century, that is, before the war and for a short time in some countries after the war.
But over time, it was abandoned. Even after the crisis of 1970, the financial crisis, it was said that gold ceased to be the world's money and means of payment, because it has low liquidity.
Nevertheless, the metal standard has been preserved to a certain extent, because it is now included in a more modern form, the gold-division standard. What is a division standard?
It is a modern standard. In this case, the currency is selected in relation to some currencies. You can choose a currency parity in relation to one currency, you can choose a currency in relation to a basket, you can choose only to special borrowing rights, you can choose a currency in relation to gold, special borrowing rights, and so on.
If you pay attention to the state of the Russian currency reserves and look at what hard currencies they consist of, then until recently, the main reserve currency, in addition to special borrowing rights and gold, was the dollar.
However, such a dependence on the dollar in the event of instability and various political fluctuations in the United States is quite dangerous for any currency system.
As soon as it became possible to replenish the country's reserves with a hard European currency, European currencies began to enter the country's currency reserves.
In modern conditions, when the euro zone was formed, the currency component includes 45% of the dollar and euro, and 10% of the pound sterling, which is also a fairly solid and stable currency.
In principle, if you look at the value of the gold reserve, then the value of the euro is 60% of our currency reserve, and, accordingly, the value of the dollar is much lower.
The replenishment of our gold reserve may be a stream of Japanese yen. This was announced back in October 2006, and the Japanese Minister of Finance was satisfied with the trend in Russian financial and currency policy.
But so far, the exact content of the Japanese yen in the currency component has not been announced. Apparently, the Japanese yen will be taken up by 10% of the dollar and pound sterling.
It is true that, given that China is the world's factory and the main export partner of many countries in the world, some countries are thinking about including Chinese yuan in their currency components. But this decision has not yet been made.
The next component of the currency system is the currency regime. Depending on how developed the country is, what types of internal economic policy it carries out, one country or another adheres to various options for the flexibility of the currency rate.
We can consider three options for the flexibility of the currency rate. The most extreme option is the hard-fixed currency rate. The other opposite side of the currency flexibility is the free-floating currency rate, the ideal floating rate.
And in the meantime, the regulated floating rate, which in the 70s was termed dirty floating, i.e. floating related to the state interventions of the Central Bank on the currency market, with the purchase and sale of currency and, accordingly, the maintenance of one or another measure of their domestic currency.
The hard-fixed currency rate, although it seems that countries in the modern world should abandon it, nevertheless, it has certain advantages, which we will talk about later.
But in the ideal, the currency rate should rise, because the purity of the purchasing power is much higher, because China is now leading us in terms of foreign trade, in terms of the pace of foreign trade in the world.
The options for the floating currency rate are the fixed currency rate, which automatically changes depending on the macroeconomic indicators listed in the legislation, for example, the level of inflation or the payment balance of the country.
The next direction is the regulated floating currency rate. How does the state manage this floating rate? This is not an automatic change.
It is assumed that the Central Bank in this case makes a decision to change the currency rate by means of intervention on the currency market. I repeat, the purchase and sale of the same currency, as a result of which the currency rate of the country must be somehow corrected.
And the last option of the floating currency rate is the independent floating rate without the intervention of the state. The question arises, is it not an independent floating rate, such an ideal option of the floating currency rate as a perfect competition?
No, the independent floating currency rate in such a system is periodically used by countries when they have a crisis in the national financial system. And in order to find out at what level the currency rate becomes more or less, and then to correct it, maybe to implement a policy of maintaining this currency rate,
the mechanism of non-interference of the state and the independent floating rate is included. In particular, in the 1970s, at the time of the financial currency crisis, European countries completely released their currency rates for 1-2 months to somehow navigate the currency space.
What are the modern ways to fix the currency rate? The most common is the fixation of one currency, but nevertheless, many countries fix the currency rate according to the value of the currency basket.
For example, modern Belarus fixes its currency rate in the basket of solid currencies of the dollar and euro, but also to the currency of neighboring countries, that is, Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, Ukraine. And since September 1, 2000, the Russian ruble has been included in the fixation basket according to the decision of the Central Bank of Belarus.
Traditionally, when fixing the currency rate according to the value of the currency basket, the most stable partners in international trade and currency-financial relations are used.
In history, when the EU did not yet have a single currency, many developing countries, former colonies of European countries, just fixed their currency rates to the former metropolis, for example, to the French franc or to the German mark.
This trend has been preserved to a certain extent for them, because they now fix their currency rate to the euro.
The soft form of currency rate fixing is the currency corridor. This is also an option for regulated floating, but it is assumed that the Central Bank of Belarus announces in advance at what intervals, at what limits the currency rate will fluctuate.
The fixed currency rate is also subject to the possibility of a certain deviation. Why? Because, in the end, there is a free supply and demand currency market, and the influence of supply and demand can make the market currency rate deviate from the fixed currency rate.
And so, in order not to affect the stability of the national currency, the Central Bank of Belarus allows a deviation of 1.5% to 2.5% at the fixed currency rate. As soon as the fluctuations reach the limit of 1.5%, the Central Bank of Belarus carries out an intervention and corrects the currency rate.
If the Central Bank of Belarus did not have enough funds for conversion, then a devaluation of the currency rate occurs, that is, it decreases. Or, on the contrary, if the global market tendency is such that the currency should be stronger, a revaluation occurs, as it was in the 20th century with the Japanese yen, when they could not support a lower currency rate with the resources of their Central Bank.
Let's return to the currency corridor. The regulated floating within the framework of the currency corridor already suggests fluctuations of more than 2-3%.
In Russia, until 1998, there was a currency corridor, and the width of the currency corridor was 15%. Somewhere in 1996-1997, just before the currency crisis, it was slightly reduced to 13%, but in general, they could not completely contain the fluctuations of the currency rate.
If we talk about the currency corridor used in the 1970s, then there was a rather interesting situation when the currency corridor was generally called a snake in the tunnel.
Because the top and bottom levels of this tunnel were determined by European countries by the sum of the top level, that is, in this case, the cheapest currency rate, the sum of the lowest currency rates and the bottom level, that is, the strong currency rate when fluctuating the currency rate, by the group of the strongest currencies of the European Union.
But again, such a currency corridor option was managed to keep for the EU for only a few months. Accordingly, the EU currency system came to the conclusion that it was necessary to simply release the currency rates and support them at the expense of the intervention of the Central Bank without the announcement of the currency corridor.
What is the situation in the modern currency system in Russia? In Russia, there is a floating currency rate, but this is again a regular floating. The currency corridor has already been canceled, since the Russian ruble has become more stable and is subject to less fluctuations.
The second reason for stabilization is the huge inflow of oil dollars or euro-currencies that flow into the Russian financial territory due to the price increase in oil and energy.
When the current currency rate of the Russian ruble is determined in modern conditions, it is not used by the quadra system, that is, the system that I have already mentioned, when we have euro, dollar, yen and pound sterling in our currency reserves, but is used for current calculations of the bivalutic basket, that is, euro and dollar.
60% of the calculations are made in dollars, and, accordingly, the fluctuation of the dollar-USA rate is taken into account, 40% of the bivalutic basket is taken into account by the euro fluctuation.
If you look closely at the chart on the slide, then at the moment when the fluctuations of the ruble rate are the most significant, this is February 2006, and as you can see, the bivalutic basket price has gone up sharply.
The ruble has increased significantly, which is not beneficial for foreign trade. At this time, the central bank's currency intervention is at its peak.
The central bank is trying to change the situation on the currency exchange. And then the process is stabilized during the first quarter of 2006. This is due to the fact that at this time, depending on the financial situation, companies are throwing out currency in the form of payments to the market.
And if such a situation arises, then the central bank's intervention will gradually subside. And by October 2006, it was even stated that the central bank will not temporarily interfere in the fluctuation of the currency exchange.
But, nevertheless, I will repeat once again, the high currency exchange rate is not beneficial for export. Based on this, the central bank will still interfere in the fluctuations of the ruble currency exchange rate in modern conditions.
The next diagram shows the dynamics of the official exchange rate of the dollar-euro currency. Accordingly, as we can see, the US dollar exchange rate is fluctuating in the opposite direction from the euro-ruble exchange rate.
Due to this, we can imagine that the exchange rate of the ruble is being established somewhere in the middle of this fluctuation scale.
Now let's move away from the reality of the Russian currency market and see how the exchange rate is determined. Based on this, we will understand what kind of intervention the central bank should carry out.
If the state does not act on the currency market, and some aggressive speculators do not act, and they can be various financial institutions, banks, financial organizations, funds, then, depending on the demand and the offer, an equal exchange rate is established.
Please note that in the scheme, in the calculation of the exchange rate, there is a demand and offer for the dollar. That is, the exchange rate is the price of the domestic currency expressed in the units of foreign currency.
The offer of the dollar in the Russian market is related to export, and the demand for the dollar in the Russian market is related to import. Of course, the flow of currency to the domestic market and the demand for the domestic market establishes a certain exchange rate.
If the situation starts to change and the exchange rate of the ruble fluctuates to 7 rubles per dollar, then such a cheap dollar will be a good option.
In this case, such an expensive dollar will be a situation when there will be excess dollars in the market. On the other hand, if the exchange rate drops to 4 rubles per dollar, then, accordingly, there will be a deficit of dollars in the currency market.
If now the central bank decides to intervene in the currency market to somehow support the exchange rate, if the state does not interfere, then an excess offer of dollars for such an expensive exchange rate will eventually lead to a drop in demand for the dollar.
And again, the balance will return to 5 rubles per dollar, according to our example. If the situation is 4 rubles per dollar, then at such a low price, of course, they will want to offer the dollar to a smaller number of counteragents, but they will want to buy the dollar to a larger number of agents.
The demand will be higher than the offer, according to the law of demand and offer, the price of the dollar will begin to rise and will be set at 5 rubles per dollar.
Accordingly, what should the central bank do if it is trying to correct the exchange rate that has been established?
If the central bank believes that the exchange rate for the dollar is too high and such an expensive Russian currency does not meet the demand of exporters, then the central bank of Russia will intervene, throw rubles into the market and buy dollars.
Thus, the exchange rate of the ruble begins to decline. If the opposite situation arises, the ruble is too cheap, which can eventually affect inflation in the long term, then the opposite situation of intervention of the central bank of Russia will occur.
What are the preferences of the currency regimes, depending on how developed the country is?
If these are economically developed countries, then they are not afraid of the floating currency rate, although ideal floating, as I said, can be found quite rarely and the ideal floating system is usually turned on only when the financial instability.
But the soft correction of the floating currency rate is the program that is used by all developed countries of the world.
And through the credit-money monetary policy, the internal macroeconomic stimulation of economic growth is carried out.
It is not by chance that the proposal for the reconstruction of the Russian economy, which originated from the United States at the end of the 20th century, was associated with monetary-credit-money policy.
And this policy is considered the most suitable for the soft floating of the floating currency rate. Developing countries, on the contrary, are afraid of strong fluctuations in the currency and are ready to support a fixed currency rate at any cost.
The main policy of the country, which can support the currency rate and stabilize the internal economic system, will be the budgetary-tax policy.
Of course, transitional economies prefer not a rigidly fixed currency rate, but a currency corridor. But again, any currency rate system that assumes floating allows dishonest players or currency speculators to enter the market.
And if such an intervention is beneficial to the world community, then the floating currency rate, as well as the regulated floating, is at greater risk than the fixed currency rate.
What are the benefits and losses from the fixing of the foreign currency rate and, accordingly, the domestic currency? The benefit is, first of all, the monetary discipline.
When a fixed currency rate is announced, a fairly rigid program for calculating and stabilizing the currency is carried out. They are practically trying not to include a money machine in order to solve the problem of budget deficit.
The second benefit is stability and independence from currency speculations. But until this speculative attack is not carried out by some transnational banks, which often have more reserves than the national economy.
I will repeat, this is the same example that happened with Japan in the second half of the 20th century.
What are the negative aspects of the foreign currency rate? First, the loss of the ability to carry out independent monetary policy.
Because you always have to adjust your currency rate to the monetary policy of the country to which you fix your currency rate.
The second drawback is the import of foreign problems. If the currency rate of the country we are trying to rely on starts to fall, then there are problems for the domestic currency. It starts to get more expensive.
For some countries, this is good, but for others it is a negative factor of export. On the other hand, if foreign currency starts to get more expensive, and our currency starts to get cheaper, then the joy of exporters does not always turn into the joy of the entire country's economy.
The last drawback is the possibility of a collective attack on the fixed currency rate as a significant and terrible danger posed by the fixed currency rate.
The next question is an important and relevant question. I have already said that the parity of purchasing power of our ruble should be 15 rubles per dollar.
From the point of view of a national consumer, I can only be happy with such a currency rate and say, hurray, my salary and income have increased dramatically. However, the Central Bank of Russia reduces the currency rate of the ruble. What is the situation here? Why is this situation not profitable?
Why is Italy and Portugal, which have joined the EU, a more solid currency than the Italian and Portuguese national currencies that existed before the introduction of the euro, why are they suddenly dissatisfied with the situation of the euro financial system?
And recently they have been talking about getting out of the euro system, maybe without including some mechanism, maybe it's just a conversation of discontent, because they have macroeconomic problems.
It turns out that the influence of the currency rate on foreign trade is significant. First, if the currency rate of the country is relatively low, then the country can use currency damping as a form of penetration into international markets and seizure of international markets.
In order to clarify the scheme of currency damping, we will move on to the next slide, and now pay attention to what other options there are for the influence of the currency rate on foreign trade. This is hidden protectionism.
In this case, it is assumed that if we have a weak currency rate, then the national consumer will not be able to buy a lot of foreign imports for his cheap money.
As soon as the national currency rate is increased, then our domestic consumer can buy more equipment, equipment and goods of final consumption for a more valuable ruble.
Therefore, this option of weakening the currency rate is beneficial to the country if the country tries to implement additional hidden protectionism. This was the situation before 2003 on the Russian market.
The situation of a weak currency rate led to the fact that we did not have to increase our tariff barriers during this period of time, precisely because the weak ruble automatically, for almost a decade of the end of the 20th century, protected the national economy from the rapid growth of imports.
But since 2003, this situation has changed, and the reserve of the national economy, in the form of weak ruble protectionism, has ended.
And now this mechanism does not work, because in the last three years the currency rate of the ruble has stabilized and is slowly growing. And the last unpleasant option of the influence of the currency rate is the Dutch disease.
What is the situation in the Netherlands? What does the country's financial system suffer from, including the situation of the Dutch disease?
The name of this situation was given in connection with the situation in the Dutch economy. After the crisis of 1970, which was not only financial, but also associated with a sharp increase in oil prices,
and the energy crisis, the Netherlands decided to open up the country's internal reserves. A fuel-energy complex began to develop in this country, which was previously in a stagnant state.
And the financial resources went to this fuel-energy complex. Where did they get it from? Naturally, they came from other sectors of the economy. In this regard, countries suffered, sorry, sectors that worked for internal demand, not for export.
Moreover, other non-energy sectors suffered. That is, the energy complex was developing at a rapid pace. And the increase in energy prices led to a huge flow of foreign convertible currency to the territory of the Netherlands.
The Dutch gulden started to grow at that time. Thus, the export prices for Dutch oil, gas and energy products began to rise.
But the demand for these goods in the world is not so elastic. There is no reaction that if the prices for oil have risen, they are still bought. But the demand for goods that, in addition to energy, the Netherlands exported, was in a crisis situation.
That is, for such high prices, these goods were not bought. Thus, the Dutch disease hit the structure of the economy twice. The first blow is the withdrawal of resources from other sectors in favor of the export-oriented sector.
But also within the framework of the export-oriented sector, as a result of the growth of the national currency, the pumping of profits into the energy sector, and, in this case, the loss of other export sectors.
In addition to the problems with the industry proportions in the country, there are also problems with the currency-financial component of the macroeconomy.
Let's look at the diagram. The price of a kilogram of carrots is 25 rubles per dollar.
So, in rubles, this price is 25 rubles. If someone abroad decides to buy this carrot, he will pay 1 dollar. Now imagine that the exchange rate has become weaker, and now for a dollar, you can get 30 rubles.
The price of the carrot has not changed. And now, in order to buy a kilogram of carrots, a foreign importer will pay only 84 cents.
It turns out that with relatively stable world prices and domestic prices for this product, the relative price in the dollar or foreign currency has decreased, and, accordingly, such an export will be better bought.
What else is the situation related to the profits from the decrease in the currency exchange rate, in addition to the decrease in prices, which is connected with the Russian situation, which is now subject to the Dutch disease.
The situation is related to the fact that our oil and gas exporters, and our export is mainly raw materials, unfortunately, at the moment, they get much more rubles in the ruble ratio, having received currency revenue in dollars or euros.
And, accordingly, they get a profit on the difference in the exchange rate.
Based on this, Russia has a strong group of influence on the decrease in the currency exchange rate, primarily exporters.
But we must not forget that importers are interested in the increase in the currency exchange rate. And not only end-use goods, clothing, food products, but also importers who supply equipment, machines, equipment and technologies to their factories.
And, of course, the stronger the exchange rate, the more new technologies they can buy in the West. The weaker the exchange rate, the less stable the situation will be and the less preferable for importers.
So, the struggle of the two forces in any national economy, that is, the interests of exporters and the interests of importers are facing, and depending on this, they affect the government and the currency policy is being developed, which, again, is a kind of compromise between the interests of the domestic economy and the domestic economy oriented to export.
What are the main factors of the currency exchange rate? Let's summarize. First of all, this is the interest rate on loans. How can the interest rate on loans affect the currency exchange rate?
If we decide to make payments by export or import, then it is assumed that if we do not have a delivery immediately, but after a certain period of time, then the exporter or importer risks that during this time his currency exchange rate will change significantly.
Based on this, he has a choice. For example, to take and put the currency in which he is going to pay his contracts in the bank, get a percentage and this percentage will cover the currency risks. Therefore, the interest rate on loans abroad and in the national economy will definitely affect the currency exchange rate.
And take the situation in the United States. Just in the last quarter, the level of the US currency exchange rate rose due to the fact that the central bank of the United States, the so-called Federal Reserve System, raised the interest rate on refinancing, that is, on loans and deposits of their central bank.
The next factor that affects the currency exchange rate is inflation. Inflation leads to devaluation of the currency. And in the end, when the money mass is too inflated compared to the mass of goods on the market, this is one of the reasons for inflation, or the costs are too high, and therefore the prices for goods are rising, in the end, the monetary factor of inflation leads to the fact that the currency exchange rate begins to weaken and fall.
The level of income that is expressed in the GDP, or in general in the GDP that is created in the country, how it affects the currency exchange rate. It is enough to say that it is good to have rich neighbors. Why? Because they are ready to buy our export at a higher price. Accordingly, the level of income abroad is interesting for our exporters.
And if the income of our country is growing, what is the situation? Then our consumers become richer. But they are ready to buy not only domestic goods, but they are also ready to buy imports. Thus, they begin to buy imports, often more than is necessary for the balance of the currency exchange rate, and then it affects as a negative factor on the currency exchange rate.
Now in Russia, the situation is such that the stabilizing currency exchange rate has forced imports to increase. But so far this situation is not terrible. On the contrary, the increase in imports works as a kind of reference to the decrease in the currency exchange rate.
Foreign trade policy is also a factor of the currency exchange rate. Because, of course, if we have tariff and other foreign trade barriers, then we will have a limit on the flow of exports and imports, and accordingly a limit on the flow of payments.
Therefore, foreign trade policy for a good, floating, albeit adjustable currency exchange rate should be liberal. The next and last factor that I bring to our list is monetary and credit-money policy.
As I said, the amount of money in the economy, in the end, affects inflation. On the other hand, in the medium and long term, it will certainly affect the currency exchange rate.
And if, within the framework of credit-money policy, the government includes a printing press to reduce the deficit of the state budget, then just this excess money is thrown into two markets, the market of securities and the market of currency.
And then, as we assume, the offer of a ruble will be higher than a dollar or higher than a euro, the currency exchange rate of the ruble begins to fall. This is another factor that affects the internal system as such.
All these components that I listed can be considered in a foreign country. Why? Because all these six components will affect the exchange rate in relation to which we recognize the exchange rate of the Russian national currency.
If the monetary authorities of the United States introduce a policy of reducing or increasing the interest rate, this is reflected in all the currencies that determine their floating exchange rate, including in relation to the US dollar.
Thus, we have considered the main factors of the exchange rate and the main topic.
Thank you.